
Julius Caesar

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Gaius Julius Caesar (13 July 100 BC – 15 March 44 BC) was a Roman
general and statesman. He played a critical role in the gradual
transformation of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire.

In 60 BC, Caesar entered into a political alliance with Crassus and
Pompey that was to dominate Roman politics for several years. Their
attempts to amass power through populist tactics were opposed within
the Roman Senate by the conservative elite, among them Cato the
Younger with the frequent support of Cicero. Caesar's conquest of
Gaul, completed by 51 BC, extended Rome's territory to the English
Channel and the Rhine. Caesar became the first Roman general to cross
both when he built a bridge across the Rhine and conducted the first
invasion of Britain. These achievements granted him unmatched military
power and threatened to eclipse Pompey's standing. The balance of
power was further upset by the death of Crassus in 53 BC. Political
realignments in Rome finally led to a standoff between Caesar and
Pompey, the latter having taken up the cause of the Senate. Ordered by
the senate to stand trial in Rome for various charges, Caesar marched
from Gaul to Italy with his legions, crossing the Rubicon in 49
BC. This sparked a civil war from which he emerged as the unrivaled
leader of the Roman world.

After assuming control of government, he began extensive reforms of
Roman society and government. He centralised the bureaucracy of the
Republic and was eventually proclaimed "dictator in perpetuity". A
group of senators, led by Marcus Junius Brutus, assassinated the
dictator on the Ides of March (15 March) 44 BC, hoping to restore the
constitutional government of the Republic. However, the result was a
series of civil wars, which ultimately led to the establishment of the
permanent Roman Empire by Caesar's adopted heir Octavius (later known
as Augustus). Much of Caesar's life is known from his own accounts of
his military campaigns, and other contemporary sources, mainly the
letters and speeches of Cicero and the historical writings of
Sallust. The later biographies of Caesar by Suetonius and Plutarch are
also major sources.

Early life and career

Caesar was born into a patrician family, the gens Julia, which claimed
descent from Iulus, son of the legendary Trojan prince Aeneas,
supposedly the son of the goddess Venus. The cognomen "Caesar"
originated, according to Pliny the Elder, with an ancestor who was
born by caesarean section (from the Latin verb to cut, caedere,
caes-). The Historia Augusta suggests three alternative explanations:
that the first Caesar had a thick head of hair (Latin caesaries); that
he had bright grey eyes (Latin oculis caesiis); or that he killed an
elephant (caesai in Moorish) in battle. Caesar issued coins featuring
images of elephants, suggesting that he favoured this interpretation
of his name. Despite their ancient pedigree, the Julii Caesares were
not especially politically influential. Caesar's father, also called
Gaius Julius Caesar governed the province of Asia, while his mother,
Aurelia Cotta, came from an influential family. Little is recorded of
Caesar's childhood. Caesar's formative years were a time of
turmoil. There were several wars from 91 BC to 82 BC, although from 82
BC to 80 BC, the dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla was purging Rome of
his political enemies. Domestically, Roman politics was bitterly
divided. In 85 BC Caesar's father died suddenly so at sixteen Caesar
was the head of the family. The following year he was nominated to be
the new high priest of Jupiter. Since the holder of that position not
only had to be a patrician but also be married to a patrician, he
broke off his engagement to a plebeian girl he had been betrothed to
since boyhood, and married Lucius Cinna's daughter Cornelia. Then,
having brought Mithridates to terms, Sulla returned to Rome and had
himself appointed to the revived office of dictator. Sulla's
proscriptions saw hundreds of his political enemies killed or
exiled. Caesar, as the nephew of Marius and son-in-law of Cinna, was
targeted. He was stripped of his inheritance, his wife's dowry and his
priesthood, but he refused to divorce Cornelia and was forced to go
into hiding. The threat against him was lifted by the intervention of
his mother's family, which included supporters of Sulla, and the
Vestal Virgins. Sulla gave in reluctantly, and is said to have
declared that he saw many a Marius in Caesar.

Caesar left Rome and joined the army, where he won the Civic Crown for
his part in an important siege. On a mission to Bithynia to secure the
assistance of King Nicomedes's fleet, he spent so long at his court
that rumours of an affair with the king arose, which Caesar would
vehemently deny for the rest of his life. Ironically, the loss of his
priesthood had allowed him to pursue a military career: the high
priest of Jupiter was not permitted to touch a horse, sleep three
nights outside his own bed or one night outside Rome, or look upon an
army. Hearing of Sulla's death in 78 BC, Caesar felt safe enough to
return to Rome. Lacking means since his inheritance was confiscated,
he acquired a modest house in a lower-class neighbourhood of
Rome. Instead, he turned to legal advocacy. He became known for his
exceptional oratory, accompanied by impassioned gestures and a
high-pitched voice, and ruthless prosecution of former governors
notorious for extortion and corruption.

On the way across the Aegean Sea, Caesar was kidnapped by pirates and
held prisoner. He maintained an attitude of superiority throughout his
captivity. When the pirates thought to demand a ransom of twenty
talents of silver, he insisted they ask for fifty. After the ransom
was paid, Caesar raised a fleet, pursued and captured the pirates, and
imprisoned them. He had them crucified on his own authority, as he had
promised while in captivity—a promise the pirates had taken as a
joke. As a sign of leniency, he first had their throats cut. He was
soon called back into military action in Asia, raising a band of
auxiliaries to repel an incursion from the east.

On his return to Rome, he was elected military tribune, a first step
in a political career. He was elected quaestor for 69 BC, and during
that year he delivered the funeral oration for his aunt Julia. His
wife, Cornelia, also died that year. After her funeral, in the spring
or early summer of 69 BC, Caesar went to serve his quaestorship in
Spain. While there he is said to have encountered a statue of
Alexander the Great, and realized with dissatisfaction he was now at
an age when Alexander had the world at his feet, while he had achieved
comparatively little. On his return in 67 BC, he married Pompeia, a
granddaughter of Sulla, and whom he later divorced. In 63 BC, he ran
for election to the post of Pontifex Maximus, chief priest of the
Roman state religion. He ran against two powerful senators. There were
accusations of bribery by all sides. Caesar won comfortably, despite
his opponents' greater experience and standing. When Cicero, who was
consul that year, exposed Catiline's conspiracy to seize control of
the republic, several senators accused Caesar of involvement in the
plot.

After his praetorship, Caesar was appointed to govern Spain, but he
was still in considerable debt and needed to satisfy his creditors
before he could leave. He turned to Marcus Licinius Crassus, one of
Rome's richest men. In return for political support in his opposition
to the interests of Pompey, Crassus paid some of Caesar's debts and
acted as guarantor for others. Even so, to avoid becoming a private
citizen and open to prosecution for his debts, Caesar left for his
province before his praetorship had ended. In Spain, he conquered two
local tribes and was hailed as imperator by his troops, reformed the
law regarding debts, and completed his governorship in high esteem. As
imperator, Caesar was entitled to a triumph. However, he also wanted
to stand for consul, the most senior magistracy in the republic. If he
were to celebrate a triumph, he would have to remain a soldier and
stay outside the city until the ceremony, but to stand for election he
would need to lay down his command and enter Rome as a private
citizen. He could not do both in the time available. He asked the
senate for permission to stand in absentia, but Cato blocked the
proposal. Faced with the choice between a triumph and the consulship,
Caesar chose the consulship.

Consulship and military campaigns

In 60 BC, Caesar sought election as consul for 59 BC. Two other
candidates stood for the consulship, and the election was dirty. Even
Cato, with his reputation for incorruptibility, is said to have
resorted to bribery in favor of one of Caesar's opponents. Caesar won,
along with conservative Marcus Bibulus.

Caesar was already in Crassus' political debt, but he also made
overtures to Pompey. Pompey and Crassus had been at odds for a decade,
so Caesar tried to reconcile them. Between the three of them, they had
enough money and political influence to control public business. This
informal alliance, known as the First Triumvirate (rule of three men),
was cemented by the marriage of Pompey to Caesar's daughter
Julia. Caesar also married again, this time Calpurnia, who was the
daughter of another powerful senator.

Caesar proposed a law for the redistribution of public lands to the
poor, a proposal supported by Pompey, by force of arms if need be, and
by Crassus, making the triumvirate public. Pompey filled the city with
soldiers, and the triumvirate's opponents were intimidated. Bibulus
attempted to declare the omens unfavorable and thus void the new law,
but was driven from the forum by Caesar's armed supporters. His
bodyguards had their ceremonial axes broken, two high magistrates
accompanying him were wounded, and Bibulus had a bucket of excrement
thrown over him. In fear of his life, he retired to his house for the
rest of the year, issuing occasional proclamations of bad omens. These
attempts to obstruct Caesar's legislation proved ineffective. Roman
satirists ever after referred to the year as "the consulship of Julius
and Caesar".

When Caesar was first elected, the aristocracy tried to limit his
future power by allotting the woods and pastures of Italy, rather than
the governorship of a province, as his military command duty after his
year in office was over. With the help of political allies, Caesar
later had this overturned, and was instead appointed to govern
Cisalpine Gaul (northern Italy) and Illyricum (southeastern Europe),
with Transalpine Gaul (southern France) later added, giving him
command of four legions. The term of his governorship, and thus his
immunity from prosecution, was set at five years, rather than the
usual one. When his consulship ended, Caesar narrowly avoided
prosecution for the irregularities of his year in office, and quickly
left for his province.

Conquest of Gaul

Main article: Gallic Wars

Caesar was still deeply in debt, and there was money to be made as a
governor, whether by extortion or by military adventurism. Caesar had
four legions under his command, two of his provinces bordered on
unconquered territory, and parts of Gaul were known to be
unstable. Some of Rome's Gallic allies had been defeated by their
rivals, with the help of a contingent of Germanic tribes. The Romans
feared these tribes were preparing to migrate south, closer to Italy,
and that they had warlike intent. Caesar raised two new legions and
defeated these tribes.

In response to Caesar's earlier activities, the tribes in the
north-east began to arm themselves. Caesar treated this as an
aggressive move, and, after an inconclusive engagement against the
united tribes, he conquered the tribes piecemeal. Meanwhile, one of
his legions began the conquest of the tribes in the far north
(directly opposite Britain). During the spring of 56 BC, the
Triumvirate held a conference, as Rome was in turmoil and Caesar's
political alliance was coming undone. The meeting renewed the
Triumvirate and extended Caesar's governorship for another five
years. The conquest of the north was soon completed, while a few
pockets of resistance remained. Caesar now had a secure base from
which to launch an invasion of Britain.

In 55 BC Caesar repelled an incursion into Gaul by two Germanic
tribes, and followed it up by building a bridge across the Rhine River
and making a show of force in Germanic territory, before returning and
dismantling the bridge. Late that summer, having subdued two other
tribes, he crossed into Britain, claiming that the Britons had aided
one of his enemies the previous year. His intelligence information was
poor, and although he gained a beachhead on the coast, he could not
advance further, and returned to Gaul for the winter. He returned the
following year, better prepared and with a larger force, and achieved
more. He advanced inland, and established a few alliances. However,
poor harvests led to widespread revolt in Gaul, which forced Caesar to
leave Britain for the last time.

While Caesar was in Britain his daughter Julia, Pompey's wife, had
died in childbirth. Caesar tried to re-secure Pompey's support by
offering him his great-niece in marriage, but Pompey declined. In 53
BC Crassus was killed leading a failed invasion of the east. Rome was
on the edge of civil war. Pompey was appointed sole consul as an
emergency measure, and married the daughter of a political opponent of
Caesar. The Triumvirate was dead.

In 52 BC another, larger revolt erupted in Gaul, led by
Vercingetorix. Vercingetorix managed to unite the Gallic tribes and
proved an astute commander, defeating Caesar in several engagements,
but Caesar's elaborate siege-works at the Battle of Alesia finally
forced his surrender. Despite scattered outbreaks of warfare the
following year, Gaul was effectively conquered. Plutarch claimed that
the army had fought against three million men during the Gallic Wars,
of whom 1 million died, and another million were enslaved. The Romans
subjugated 300 tribes and destroyed 800 cities. However, in view of
the difficulty in finding accurate counts in the first place, Caesar's
propagandistic purposes, and the common exaggeration of numbers in
ancient texts, the totals of enemy combatants are likely to be too
high.

Civil war

In 50 BC, the Senate, led by Pompey, ordered Caesar to disband his
army and return to Rome because his term as governor had
finished. Caesar thought he would be prosecuted if he entered Rome
without the immunity enjoyed by a magistrate. Pompey accused Caesar of
insubordination and treason. In January 49 BC, Caesar crossed the
Rubicon river (the frontier boundary of Italy) with only one legion
and ignited civil war. Upon crossing the Rubicon, Caesar, according to
Plutarch and Suetonius, is supposed to have quoted the Athenian
playwright Menander, in Greek, "the die is cast". Erasmus, however,
notes that the more accurate translation of the Greek imperative mood
would be "alea icta esto" let the die be cast. Pompey and much of the
senate fled to the south, having little confidence in his newly raised
troops. Despite greatly outnumbering Caesar, who only had his
Thirteenth Legion with him, Pompey did not intend to fight. Caesar
pursued Pompey, hoping to capture him before his legions could
escape. Pompey managed to escape before Caesar could capture
him. Caesar decided to head for Spain, while leaving Italy under the
control of Mark Antony. Caesar made an astonishing 27-day route-march
to Spain, where he defeated Pompey's lieutenants. He then returned
east, to challenge Pompey in Greece where in July 48 BC at Dyrrhachium
Caesar barely avoided a catastrophic defeat. He decisively defeated
Pompey at Pharsalus in an exceedingly short engagement later that
year.

In Rome, Caesar was appointed dictator, with Mark Antony as his Master
of the Horse (second in command); Caesar presided over his own
election to a second consulship and then, after eleven days, resigned
this dictatorship. Caesar then pursued Pompey to Egypt, where Pompey
was soon murdered. Caesar then became involved with an Egyptian civil
war between the child pharaoh and his sister, wife, and co-regent
queen, Cleopatra. Perhaps as a result of the pharaoh's role in
Pompey's murder, Caesar sided with Cleopatra; he is reported to have
wept at the sight of Pompey's head, which was offered to him by the
pharaoh as a gift. In any event, Caesar defeated the pharaoh's forces
in 47 BC and installed Cleopatra as ruler. Caesar and Cleopatra
celebrated their victory with a triumphant procession on the Nile in
the spring of 47 BC. The royal barge was accompanied by 400 additional
ships, introducing Caesar to the luxurious lifestyle of the Egyptian
pharaohs. Caesar and Cleopatra never married, as Roman law recognized
marriages only between two Roman citizens. Caesar continued his
relationship with Cleopatra throughout his last marriage, which lasted
14 years – in Roman eyes, this did not constitute adultery – and may
have fathered a son called Caesarion. Cleopatra visited Rome on more
than one occasion, residing in Caesar's villa just outside Rome across
the Tiber.

Late in 48 BC, Caesar was again appointed Dictator, with a term of one
year. After spending the first months of 47 BC in Egypt, Caesar went
to the Middle East, where he annihilated the king of Pontus; his
victory was so swift and complete that he mocked Pompey's previous
victories over such poor enemies. Thence, he proceeded to Africa to
deal with the remnants of Pompey's senatorial supporters. He quickly
gained a significant victory in 46 BC over Cato, who then committed
suicide. After this victory, he was appointed Dictator for ten
years. Nevertheless, Pompey's sons escaped to Spain. Caesar gave chase
and defeated the last remnants of opposition in the Battle of Munda in
March 45 BC. During this time, Caesar was elected to his third and
fourth terms as consul in 46 BC and 45 BC (this last time without a
colleague).

Dictatorship and assassination

While he was still campaigning in Spain, the Senate began bestowing
honors on Caesar. Caesar had not proscribed his enemies, instead
pardoning almost all, and there was no serious public opposition to
him. Great games and celebrations were held in April to honor Caesar’s
victory at Munda. Plutarch writes that many Romans found the triumph
held following Caesar's victory to be in poor taste, as those defeated
in the civil war had not been foreigners, but instead fellow
Romans. On Caesar's return to Italy in September 45 BC, he filed his
will, naming his grandnephew Gaius Octavius (Octavian) as the heir to
everything, including his name. Caesar also wrote that if Octavian
died before Caesar did, Marcus Junius Brutus would be the next heir in
succession.

During his early career, Caesar had seen how chaotic and dysfunctional
the Roman Republic had become. The republican machinery had broken
down under the weight of imperialism, the central government had
become powerless, the provinces had been transformed into independent
principalities under the absolute control of their governors, and the
army had replaced the constitution as the means of accomplishing
political goals. With a weak central government, political corruption
had spiraled out of control, and the status quo had been maintained by
a corrupt aristocracy, which saw no need to change a system that had
made its members rich.

Between his crossing of the Rubicon River in 49 BC, and his
assassination in 44 BC, Caesar established a new constitution, which
was intended to accomplish three separate goals. First, he wanted to
suppress all armed resistance out in the provinces, and thus bring
order back to the empire. Second, he wanted to create a strong central
government in Rome. Finally, he wanted to knit together the entire
empire into a single cohesive unit. The first goal was accomplished
when Caesar defeated Pompey and his supporters. To accomplish the
other two goals, he needed to ensure that his control over the
government was undisputed, and so he assumed these powers by
increasing his own authority, and by decreasing the authority of
Rome's other political institutions. Finally, he enacted a series of
reforms that were meant to address several long neglected issues, the
most important of which was his reform of the calendar.

Dictatorship

When Caesar returned to Rome, the Senate granted him triumphs for his
victories, ostensibly over Gaul, Egypt, Pharnaces and Juba, rather
than over his Roman opponents. Not everything went Caesar's way. When
Arsinoe IV, Egypt's former queen, was paraded in chains, the
spectators admired her dignified bearing and were moved to
pity. Triumphal games were held, with beast-hunts involving 400 lions,
and gladiator contests. A naval battle was held on a flooded basin at
the Field of Mars. At the Circus Maximus, two armies of war captives,
each of 2,000 people, 200 horse and 20 elephants, fought to the
death. Again, some bystanders complained, this time at Caesar's
wasteful extravagance. A riot broke out, and only stopped when Caesar
had two rioters sacrificed by the priests on the Field of Mars.

When the triumph was over, Caesar set forth to passing an
unprecedented legislative agenda.[dubious – discuss] He ordered a
census be taken, which forced a reduction in the grain dole. Then he
mandated that jurors could only come from the senate or the equestrian
ranks. Next, he passed a sumptuary law that restricted the purchase of
certain luxuries. After this, he passed a law that rewarded families
for having many children, to speed along the repopulation of
Italy. Then he passed a law that outlawed professional guilds, except
those of ancient foundation, since many of these were subversive
political clubs. He then passed a term limit law applicable to
governors. He passed a debt restructuring law, which ultimately
eliminated about a fourth of all debts owed. The Forum of Caesar, with
its Temple of Venus Genetrix, was then built among many other public
works. Caesar also tightly regulated the purchase of state-subsidised
grain and reduced the number of recipients to a fixed number, all of
whom were entered into a special register. From 47 to 44 BC he made
plans for the distribution of land to about 15,000 of his
veterans. The most important change, however, was his reform of the
calendar. The calendar at the time was regulated by the movement of
the moon, and this had resulted in a great deal of disorder. Caesar
replaced this calendar with the Egyptian calendar, which was regulated
by the sun. He set the length of the year to 365.25 days by adding an
intercalary/leap day at the end of February every fourth year. To
bring the calendar into alignment with the seasons, he decreed that
three extra months be inserted into 46 BC (the ordinary intercalary
month at the end of February, and two extra months after
November). Thus, the Julian calendar opened on 1 January 45 BC. This
calendar is almost identical to the current Western calendar.

Shortly before his assassination, he passed a few more reforms. He
established a police force, appointed officials to carry out his land
reforms, and ordered the rebuilding of Carthage and Corinth. He also
extended Latin rights throughout the Roman world, and then abolished
the tax system and reverted to the earlier version that allowed cities
to collect tribute however they wanted, rather than needing Roman
intermediaries. His assassination prevented further and larger
schemes. He wanted to build an unprecedented temple to Mars, a huge
theater, and a library on the scale of the Library of Alexandria. He
also wanted to convert Ostia to a major port, and cut a canal through
the Isthmus of Corinth. Militarily, he wanted to conquer the Dacians,
Parthians, and avenge the loss at Carrhae. Thus, he instituted a
massive mobilization. Shortly before his assassination, the senate
named him censor for life and Father of the Fatherland, and the month
of Quintilis was renamed July in his honor. He was granted further
honors, which were later used to justify his assassination as a
would-be divine monarch; coins were issued bearing his image and his
statue was placed next to those of the kings. He was granted a golden
chair in the senate house, allowed to wear triumphal dress whenever he
chose, and was offered a form of semi-official or popular cult, with
Mark Antony as his high priest.

Political reforms

The history of Caesar's political appointments is complex and
uncertain. Caesar held both the dictatorship and the tribunate, but
alternated between the consulship and the Proconsulship. His powers
within the state seem to have rested upon these magistracies. He was
first appointed dictator in 49 BC possibly to preside over elections,
but resigned his dictatorship within eleven days. In 48 BC, he was
appointed dictator again, only this time for an indefinite period, and
in 46 BC, he was appointed dictator for ten years. In February of 44
BC, one month before his assassination, he was appointed dictator for
life. Under Caesar, a significant amount of authority was vested in
his lieutenants, mostly because Caesar was frequently out of Italy. In
October of 45 BC, Caesar resigned his position as sole consul, and
facilitated the election of two successors for the remainder of the
year, which, in theory at least, restored the ordinary consulship,
since the constitution did not recognize a single consul without a
colleague. In 48 BC, Caesar was given permanent tribunician powers,
which made his person sacrosanct and allowed him to veto the senate,
although on at least one occasion, tribunes did attempt to obstruct
him. The offending tribunes in this case were brought before the
senate and divested of their office. This was not the first time that
Caesar had violated a tribune's sacrosanctity. After he had first
marched on Rome in 49 BC, he forcibly opened the treasury despite the
seal placed on it by a tribune. After the impeachment of the two
obstructive tribunes, Caesar, perhaps unsurprisingly, faced no further
opposition from other members of the Tribunician College.

In 46 BC, Caesar gave himself the title of "Prefect of the Morals",
which was an office that was new only in name, as its powers were
identical to those of the censors. Thus, he could hold censorial
powers, while technically not subjecting himself to the same checks
that the ordinary censors were subject to, and he used these powers to
fill the senate with his own partisans. He also set the precedent,
which his imperial successors followed, of requiring the senate to
bestow various titles and honors upon him. He was, for example, given
the title of "Father of the Fatherland" and "imperator". Coins bore
his likeness, and he was given the right to speak first during senate
meetings. Caesar then increased the number of magistrates who were
elected each year, which created a large pool of experienced
magistrates, and allowed Caesar to reward his supporters. Caesar even
took steps to transform Italy into a province, and to link more
tightly the other provinces of the empire into a single cohesive
unit. This addressed the underlying problem that had caused the Social
War decades earlier, where individuals outside Rome and Italy were not
considered "Roman", and thus were not given full citizenship
rights. This process, of fusing the entire Roman Empire into a single
unit, rather than maintaining it as a network of unequal
principalities, would ultimately be completed by Caesar's successor,
the emperor Augustus.

When Caesar returned to Rome in 47 BC, the ranks of the senate had
been severely depleted, and so he used his censorial powers to appoint
many new senators, which eventually raised the senate's membership to
900. All the appointments were of his own partisans, which robbed the
senatorial aristocracy of its prestige, and made the senate
increasingly subservient to him. To minimize the risk that another
general might attempt to challenge him, Caesar passed a law that
subjected governors to term limits. Near the end of his life, Caesar
began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire. Since his
absence from Rome might limit his ability to install his own consuls,
he passed a law which allowed him to appoint all magistrates in 43 BC,
and all consuls and tribunes in 42 BC. This, in effect, transformed
the magistrates from being representatives of the people to being
representatives of the dictator.

Assassination

On the Ides of March (15 March; see Roman calendar) of 44 BC, Caesar
was due to appear at a session of the Senate. Mark Antony, having
vaguely learned of the plot the night before from a terrified
Liberator named Servilius Casca, and fearing the worst, went to head
Caesar off. The plotters, however, had anticipated this and, fearing
that Antony would come to Caesar's aid, had arranged for Trebonius to
intercept him just as he approached the portico of Theatre of Pompey,
where the session was to be held, and detain him outside. (Plutarch,
however, assigns this action to delay Antony to Brutus Albinus.) When
he heard the commotion from the senate chamber, Antony fled.

According to Plutarch, as Caesar arrived at the Senate, Tillius Cimber
presented him with a petition to recall his exiled brother. The other
conspirators crowded round to offer support. Both Plutarch and
Suetonius say that Caesar waved him away, but Cimber grabbed his
shoulders and pulled down Caesar's tunic. Caesar then cried to Cimber,
"Why, this is violence!" ("Ista quidem vis est!"). At the same time,
Casca produced his dagger and made a glancing thrust at the dictator's
neck. Caesar turned around quickly and caught Casca by the
arm. According to Plutarch, he said in Latin, "Casca, you villain,
what are you doing?" Casca, frightened, shouted, "Help, brother!" in
Greek ("ἀδελφέ, βοήθει!", "adelphe, boethei!"). Within moments, the
entire group, including Brutus, was striking out at the
dictator. Caesar attempted to get away, but, blinded by blood, he
tripped and fell; the men continued stabbing him as he lay defenceless
on the lower steps of the portico. According to Eutropius, around 60
or more men participated in the assassination. He was stabbed 23
times. According to Suetonius, a physician later established that only
one wound, the second one to his chest, had been lethal. The
dictator's last words are not known with certainty, and are a
contested subject among scholars and historians alike. Suetonius
reports that others have said Caesar's last words were the Greek
phrase "καὶ σύ, τέκνον;" (transliterated as "Kai su, teknon?": "You
too, child?" in English). However, Suetonius says Caesar said
nothing. Plutarch also reports that Caesar said nothing, pulling his
toga over his head when he saw Brutus among the conspirators. The
version best known in the English-speaking world is the Latin phrase
"Et tu, Brute?" ("And you, Brutus?", commonly rendered as "You too,
Brutus?"); this derives from Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, where it
actually forms the first half of a macaronic line: "Et tu, Brute? Then
fall, Caesar." It has no basis in historical fact and Shakespeare's
use of Latin here is not from any assertion that Caesar would have
been using the language, rather than the Greek reported by Suetonius,
but because the phrase was already popular when the play was
written. According to Plutarch, after the assassination, Brutus
stepped forward as if to say something to his fellow senators; they,
however, fled the building. Brutus and his companions then marched to
the Capitol while crying out to their beloved city: "People of Rome,
we are once again free!" They were met with silence, as the citizens
of Rome had locked themselves inside their houses as soon as the
rumour of what had taken place had begun to spread. Caesar's dead body
lay where it fell on the Senate floor for nearly three hours before
other officials arrived to remove it.

A lifesize wax statue of Caesar was later erected in the forum
displaying the 23 stab wounds. A crowd who had gathered there started
a fire, which badly damaged the forum and neighbouring buildings. In
the ensuing chaos Mark Antony, Octavian (later Augustus Caesar), and
others fought a series of five civil wars, which would end in the
formation of the Roman Empire.

Aftermath of the assassination

The result unforeseen by the assassins was that Caesar's death
precipitated the end of the Roman Republic. The Roman middle and lower
classes, with whom Caesar was immensely popular and had been since
before Gaul, became enraged that a small group of aristocrats had
killed their champion. Antony, who had been drifting apart from
Caesar, capitalised on the grief of the Roman mob and threatened to
unleash them on the Optimates, perhaps with the intent of taking
control of Rome himself. However, to his surprise and chagrin, Caesar
had named his grandnephew Gaius Octavian his sole heir, bequeathing
him the immensely potent Caesar name and making him one of the
wealthiest citizens in the Republic. The crowd at the funeral boiled
over, throwing dry branches, furniture and even clothing on to
Caesar's funeral pyre, causing the flames to spin out of control,
seriously damaging the Forum. The mob then attacked the houses of
Brutus and Cassius, where they were repelled only with considerable
difficulty, ultimately providing the spark for the Liberators' civil
war, fulfilling at least in part Antony's threat against the
aristocrats. However, Antony did not foresee the ultimate outcome of
the next series of civil wars, particularly with regard to Caesar's
adopted heir. Octavian, aged only 18 when Caesar died, proved to have
considerable political skills, and while Antony dealt with Decimus
Brutus in the first round of the new civil wars, Octavian consolidated
his tenuous position. To combat Brutus and Cassius, who were massing
an enormous army in Greece, Antony needed soldiers, the cash from
Caesar's war chests, and the legitimacy that Caesar's name would
provide for any action he took against them. With the passage of the
lex Titia on 27 November 43 BC, the Second Triumvirate was officially
formed, composed of Antony, Octavian, and Caesar's loyal cavalry
commander Lepidus. It formally deified Caesar as Divus Iulius in 42
BC, and Caesar Octavian henceforth became Divi filius ("Son of a
god"). Because Caesar's clemency had resulted in his murder, the
Second Triumvirate brought back the practice of proscription,
abandoned since Sulla. It engaged in the legally sanctioned murder of
a large number of its opponents to secure funding for its forty-five
legions in the second civil war against Brutus and Cassius. Antony and
Octavius defeated them at Philippi.

Afterward, Mark Antony married Caesar's lover, Cleopatra, intending to
use the fabulously wealthy Egypt as a base to dominate Rome. A third
civil war broke out between Octavian on one hand and Antony and
Cleopatra on the other. This final civil war, culminating in the
latter's defeat at Actium, resulted in the permanent ascendancy of
Octavian, who became the first Roman emperor, under the name Caesar
Augustus, a name that raised him to the status of a deity.

Julius Caesar had been preparing to invade Parthia, the Caucasus and
Scythia, and then march back to Germania through Eastern Europe. These
plans were thwarted by his assassination. His successors did attempt
the conquests of Parthia and Germania, but without lasting results.

Julius Caesar was the first historical Roman to be officially
deified. He was posthumously granted the title Divus Iulius or Divus
Julius (the divine Julius or the deified Julius) by decree of the
Roman Senate on 1 January 42 BC. Though his temple was not dedicated
until after his death, he may have received divine honours during his
lifetime: and shortly before his assassination, Mark Antony had been
appointed as his flamen (priest). Both Octavian and Mark Antony
promoted the cult of Divus Iulius. After the death of Antony,
Octavian, as the adoptive son of Caesar, assumed the title of Divi
Filius (son of a god).

Personal life

Health and physical appearance

Based on remarks by Plutarch, Caesar is sometimes thought to have
suffered from epilepsy. Modern scholarship is "sharply divided" on the
subject, and some scholars believe that he was plagued by malaria,
particularly during the Sullan proscriptions of the 80s. Despite the
commonly held belief that Caesar suffered from epilepsy, several
specialists in headache medicine believe that a more accurate
diagnosis would be migraine headache.

Caesar had four documented episodes of what may have been complex
partial seizures. He may additionally have had absence seizures in his
youth. The earliest accounts of these seizures were made by the
biographer Suetonius, who was born after Caesar died. The claim of
epilepsy is countered among some medical historians by a claim of
hypoglycemia, which can cause epileptoid seizures.

In 2003, psychiatrist Harbour F. Hodder published what he termed as
the "Caesar Complex" theory, arguing that Caesar was a sufferer of
temporal lobe epilepsy and the debilitating symptoms of the condition
were a factor in Caesar's conscious decision to forgo personal safety
in the days leading up to his assassination.

A line from Shakespeare has sometimes been taken to mean that he was
deaf in one ear: Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf. No
classical source mentions hearing impairment in connection with
Caesar. The playwright may have been making metaphorical use of a
passage in Plutarch that does not refer to deafness at all, but rather
to a gesture Alexander of Macedon customarily made. By covering his
ear, Alexander indicated that he had turned his attention from an
accusation in order to hear the defense.

The Roman historian Suetonius describes Caesar as "tall of stature
with a fair complexion, shapely limbs, a somewhat full face, and keen
black eyes."

Name and family

Using the Latin alphabet as it existed in the day of Caesar (i.e.,
without lower case letters, "J", or "U"), Caesar's name would be
rendered "GAIVS IVLIVS CAESAR"; the form "CAIVS" is also attested,
using the old Roman representation of G by C; it is an antique form of
the more common "GAIVS". The standard abbreviation was, and this is
not archaic, "C. IVLIVS CAESAR". (The letterform "Æ" is a ligature,
which is often encountered in Latin inscriptions where it was used to
save space, and is nothing more than the letters "ae".) In Classical
Latin, it was pronounced [ˈɡaːjus ˈjuːljus ˈkajsar]. In the days of
the late Roman Republic, many historical writings were done in Greek,
a language most educated Romans studied. Young wealthy Roman boys were
often taught by Greek slaves and sometimes sent to Athens for advanced
training, as was Caesar's principal assassin, Brutus. In Greek, during
Caesar's time, his family name was written Καίσαρ, reflecting its
contemporary pronunciation. Thus, his name is pronounced in a similar
way to the pronunciation of the German Kaiser. In Vulgar Latin, the
plosive /k/ before front vowels began, due to palatalization, to be
pronounced as an affricate – hence renderings like [ˈtʃeːsar] in
Italian and [ˈtseːsar] in German regional pronunciations of Latin, as
well as the title of Tsar. With the evolution of the Romance
languages, the affricate [ts] became a fricative [s] (thus, [ˈseːsar])
in many regional pronunciations, including the French one, from which
the modern English pronunciation is derived. The original /k/ is
preserved in Norse mythology, where he is manifested as the legendary
king Kjárr.

Caesar's cognomen would itself become a title; it was greatly
promulgated by the Bible, by the famous verse "Render unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
God's". The title became the German Kaiser and Slavic Tsar/Czar. The
last tsar in nominal power was Simeon II of Bulgaria whose reign ended
in 1946; for two thousand years after Julius Caesar's assassination,
there was at least one head of state bearing his name.

Parents

Father Gaius Julius Caesar the Elder
Mother Aurelia (related to the Aurelii Cottae)

Sisters

Julia Caesaris "Maior" (the elder)
Julia Caesaris "Minor" (the younger)

Wives

First marriage to Cornelia Cinnilla, from 83 BC until her death in
childbirth in 69 or 68 BC.
Second marriage to Pompeia, from 67 BC until he divorced her around 61
BC.
Third marriage to Calpurnia Pisonis, from 59 BC until Caesar's death.

Children

Julia with Cornelia Cinnilla, born in 83 or 82 BC.
Caesarion, with Cleopatra VII, born 47 BC. He was killed at age 17 by
Caesar's adopted son Octavianus.
Adopted: Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus, his great-nephew by blood,
who later became Emperor Augustus.
Marcus Junius Brutus: The historian Plutarch notes that Caesar
believed Brutus to have been his illegitimate son, as his mother
Servilia had been Caesar's lover during their youth.

Grandchildren

Grandson from Julia and Pompey, dead at several days, unnamed.

Lovers

Cleopatra VII mother of Caesarion.
Servilia Caepionis mother of Brutus.
Eunoë, queen of Mauretania and wife of Bogudes.

Notable relatives

Gaius Marius (married to his Aunt Julia).
Mark Antony.
Lucius Julius Caesar.
Julius Sabinus, a Gaul of the Lingones at the time of the Batavian
rebellion of AD 69, claimed to be the great-grandson of Caesar on the
grounds that his great-grandmother had been Caesar's lover during the
Gallic war.

Political rumors

Roman society viewed the passive role during sexual activity,
regardless of gender, to be a sign of submission or
inferiority. Indeed, Suetonius says that in Caesar's Gallic triumph,
his soldiers sang that, "Caesar may have conquered the Gauls, but
Nicomedes conquered Caesar." According to Cicero, Bibulus, Gaius
Memmius, and others (mainly Caesar's enemies), he had an affair with
Nicomedes IV of Bithynia early in his career. The tales were repeated,
referring to Caesar as the Queen of Bithynia, by some Roman
politicians as a way to humiliate him. It is very likely that the
rumours were spread only as a form of character assassination; Caesar
himself denied the accusations repeatedly throughout his lifetime, and
according to Cassius Dio, even under oath on one occasion. This form
of slander was popular during this time in the Roman Republic to
demean and discredit political opponents. A favorite tactic used by
the opposition was to accuse a popular political rival as living a
Hellenistic lifestyle based on Greek and Eastern culture, where
homosexuality and a lavish lifestyle were more acceptable than in
Roman tradition.

Catullus wrote two poems suggesting that Caesar and his engineer
Mamurra were lovers, but later apologised.

Mark Antony charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar
through sexual favours. Suetonius described Antony's accusation of an
affair with Octavian as political slander. Octavian eventually became
the first Roman Emperor.

Literary works

Caesar was considered during his lifetime to be one of the best
orators and authors of prose in Rome—even Cicero spoke highly of
Caesar's rhetoric and style. Among his most famous works were his
funeral oration for his paternal aunt Julia and his Anticato, a
document written to blacken Cato's reputation and respond to Cicero's
Cato memorial. Poems by Caesar are also mentioned in ancient
sources. His works other than his war commentaries have been lost,
although a few sentences are quoted by other authors.

Memoirs

Commentarii de Bello Gallico, an account written by Julius Caesar
about his nine years of war in Gaul

The Commentarii de Bello Gallico (Commentaries on the Gallic War),
campaigns in Gallia and Britannia during his term as proconsul; and

The Commentarii de Bello Civili (Commentaries on the Civil War),
events of the Civil War until immediately after Pompey's death in
Egypt.

Other works historically attributed to Caesar, but whose authorship is
doubted, are:

De Bello Alexandrino (On the Alexandrine War), campaign in Alexandria;

De Bello Africo (On the African War), campaigns in North Africa; and

De Bello Hispaniensi (On the Hispanic War), campaigns in the Iberian
peninsula.

These narratives were written and published on a yearly basis during
or just after the actual campaigns, as a sort of "dispatches from the
front". Apparently simple and direct in style—to the point that
Caesar's Commentarii are commonly studied by first and second year
Latin students—they are in fact highly sophisticated tracts, aimed
most particularly at the middle-brow readership of minor
aristocrats[citation needed] in Rome, Italy, and the provinces.

Legend and legacy

In the Middle Ages Caesar was created a member of the Nine Worthies, a group of heroes encapsulating all the ideal qualities of chivalry.


+
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.
% ese ee
