
Albert Einstein

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Albert Einstein, 14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955, was a German-born
theoretical physicist who developed the theory of general relativity,
effecting a revolution in physics. For this achievement, Einstein is
often regarded as the father of modern physics, and one of the most
prolific intellects in human history. He received the 1921 Nobel Prize
in Physics "for his services to theoretical physics, and especially
for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect". The latter
was pivotal in establishing quantum theory within physics.

Near the beginning of his career, Einstein thought that Newtonian
mechanics was no longer enough to reconcile the laws of classical
mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field. This led to the
development of his special theory of relativity. He realized, however,
that the principle of relativity could also be extended to
gravitational fields, and with his subsequent theory of gravitation in
1916, he published a paper on the general theory of relativity. He
continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum
theory, which led to his explanations of particle theory and the
motion of molecules. He also investigated the thermal properties of
light which laid the foundation of the photon theory of light. In
1917, Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to model the
structure of the universe as a whole. He was visiting the United
States when Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933, and did not go back to
Germany, where he had been a professor at the Berlin Academy of
Sciences. He settled in the U.S., becoming a citizen in 1940. On the
eve of World War II, he helped alert President Franklin D. Roosevelt
that Germany might be developing an atomic weapon, and recommended
that the U.S. begin similar research; this eventually led to what
would become the Manhattan Project. Einstein was in support of
defending the Allied forces, but largely denounced using the new
discovery of nuclear fission as a weapon. Later, together with
Bertrand Russell, Einstein signed the Russell–Einstein Manifesto,
which highlighted the danger of nuclear weapons. Einstein taught
physics at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, New Jersey,
until his death in 1955.  Einstein published more than 300 scientific
papers along with over 150 non-scientific works. His great
intelligence and originality have made the word "Einstein" synonymous
with genius.

Biography

Early life and education

Albert Einstein was born in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the
German Empire on 14 March 1879. His father was Hermann Einstein, a
salesman and engineer. His mother was Pauline Einstein (née Koch). In
1880, the family moved to Munich, where his father and his uncle
founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie, a company that
manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.

The Einsteins were non-observant Jews. Albert attended a Catholic
elementary school from the age of five for three years. Later, at the
age of eight, Einstein was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium where
he received advanced primary and secondary school education until he
left Germany seven years later. Although it has been thought that
Einstein had early speech difficulties, this is disputed by the Albert
Einstein Archives, and he excelled at the first school that he
attended.

His father once showed him a pocket compass; Einstein realized that
there must be something causing the needle to move, despite the
apparent "empty space". As he grew, Einstein built models and
mechanical devices for fun and began to show a talent for
mathematics. In 1889, Max Talmud (later changed to Max Talmey)
introduced the ten-year old Einstein to key texts in science,
mathematics and philosophy, including Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure
Reason and Euclid's Elements (which Einstein called the "holy little
geometry book"). Talmud was a poor Jewish medical student from
Poland. The Jewish community arranged for Talmud to take meals with
the Einsteins each week on Thursdays for six years. During this time
Talmud wholeheartedly guided Einstein through many secular educational
interests.

In 1894, his father's company failed: direct current (DC) lost the War
of Currents to alternating current (AC). In search of business, the
Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and then, a few months
later, to Pavia. When the family moved to Pavia, Einstein stayed in
Munich to finish his studies at the Luitpold Gymnasium. His father
intended for him to pursue electrical engineering, but Einstein
clashed with authorities and resented the school's regimen and
teaching method. He later wrote that the spirit of learning and
creative thought were lost in strict rote learning. In the spring of
1895, he withdrew to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school
to let him go by using a doctor's note. During this time, Einstein
wrote his first scientific work, "The Investigation of the State of
Aether in Magnetic Fields".

Einstein applied directly to the Eidgenössische Polytechnische Schule
(ETH) in Zurich, Switzerland. Lacking the requisite Matura
certificate, he took an entrance examination, which he failed,
although he got exceptional marks in mathematics and physics. The
Einsteins sent Albert to Aarau, in northern Switzerland to finish
secondary school. While lodging with the family of Professor Jost
Winteler, he fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie. (His sister
Maja later married the Wintelers' son, Paul.) In Aarau, Einstein
studied Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. At age 17, he graduated,
and, with his father's approval, renounced his citizenship in the
German Kingdom of Württemberg to avoid military service, and in 1896
he enrolled in the four year mathematics and physics teaching diploma
program at the Polytechnic in Zurich. Marie Winteler moved to Olsberg,
Switzerland for a teaching post.

Einstein's future wife, Mileva Marić, also enrolled at the Polytechnic
that same year, the only woman among the six students in the
mathematics and physics section of the teaching diploma course. Over
the next few years, Einstein and Marić's friendship developed into
romance, and they read books together on extra-curricular physics in
which Einstein was taking an increasing interest. In 1900 Einstein was
awarded the Zurich Polytechnic teaching diploma, but Marić failed the
examination with a poor grade in the mathematics component, theory of
functions. There have been claims that Marić collaborated with
Einstein on his celebrated 1905 papers, but historians of
physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any
substantive contributions.

Marriages and children

In early 1902, Einstein and Mileva Marić had a daughter they named
Lieserl in their correspondence, who was born in Novi Sad where
Marić's parents lived. Her full name is not known, and her fate is
uncertain after 1903.

Einstein and Marić married in January 1903. In May 1904, the couple's
first son, Hans Albert Einstein, was born in Bern, Switzerland. Their
second son, Eduard, was born in Zurich in July 1910. In 1914, Einstein
moved to Berlin, while his wife remained in Zurich with their
sons. Marić and Einstein divorced on 14 February 1919, having lived
apart for five years.

Einstein married Elsa Löwenthal (née Einstein) on 2 June 1919, after
having had a relationship with her since 1912. She was his first
cousin maternally and his second cousin paternally. In 1933, they
emigrated permanently to the United States. In 1935, Elsa Einstein was
diagnosed with heart and kidney problems and died in December
1936.

Patent office

After graduating, Einstein spent almost two frustrating years
searching for a teaching post, but a former classmate's father helped
him secure a job in Bern, at the Federal Office for Intellectual
Property, the patent office, as an assistant examiner. He
evaluated patent applications for electromagnetic devices. In 1903,
Einstein's position at the Swiss Patent Office became permanent,
although he was passed over for promotion until he "fully mastered
machine technology".

Much of his work at the patent office related to questions about
transmission of electric signals and electrical-mechanical
synchronization of time, two technical problems that show up
conspicuously in the thought experiments that eventually led Einstein
to his radical conclusions about the nature of light and the
fundamental connection between space and time.

With a few friends he met in Bern, Einstein started a small discussion
group, self-mockingly named "The Olympia Academy", which met regularly
to discuss science and philosophy. Their readings included the works
of Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach, and David Hume, which influenced his
scientific and philosophical outlook.

Academic career

In 1901, Einstein had a paper on the capillary forces of a straw
published in the prestigious Annalen der Physik. On 30 April 1905,
he completed his thesis, with Alfred Kleiner, Professor of
Experimental Physics, serving as pro-forma advisor. Einstein was
awarded a PhD by the University of Zurich. His dissertation was
entitled "A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions". That same
year, which has been called Einstein's annus mirabilis or "miracle
year", he published four groundbreaking papers, on the photoelectric
effect, Brownian motion, special relativity, and the equivalence of
matter and energy, which were to bring him to the notice of the
academic world.

By 1908, he was recognized as a leading scientist, and he was
appointed lecturer at the University of Bern. The following year, he
quit the patent office and the lectureship to take the position of
physics docent at the University of Zurich. He became a full
professor at Karl-Ferdinand University in Prague in 1911. In 1914, he
returned to Germany after being appointed director of the Kaiser
Wilhelm Institute for Physics (1914–1932) and a professor at the
Humboldt University of Berlin, although with a special clause in his
contract that freed him from most teaching obligations. He became a
member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. In 1916, Einstein was
appointed president of the German Physical Society
(1916–1918).

In 1911, he had calculated that, based on his new theory of general
relativity, light from another star would be bent by the Sun's
gravity. That prediction was claimed confirmed by observations made by
a British expedition led by Sir Arthur Eddington during the solar
eclipse of 29 May 1919. International media reports of this made
Einstein world famous. On 7 November 1919, the leading British
newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution
in Science – New Theory of the Universe – Newtonian Ideas
Overthrown". (Much later, questions were raised whether the
measurements were accurate enough to support Einstein's theory.)

In 1921, Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. Because
relativity was still considered somewhat controversial, it was
officially bestowed for his explanation of the photoelectric
effect. He also received the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in
1925.

Travels abroad

Einstein visited New York City for the first time on 2 April 1921,
where he received an official welcome by the Mayor, followed by three
weeks of lectures and receptions. He went on to deliver several
lectures at Columbia University and Princeton University, and in
Washington he accompanied representatives of the National Academy of
Science on a visit to the White House. On his return to Europe he was
the guest of the British statesman and philosopher Viscount Haldane in
London, where he met several renowned scientific, intellectual and
political figures, and delivered a lecture at Kings College.

In 1922, he traveled throughout Asia and later to Palestine, as part
of a six-month excursion and speaking tour. His travels included
Singapore, Ceylon, and Japan, where he gave a series of lectures to
thousands of Japanese. His first lecture in Tokyo lasted four hours,
after which he met the emperor and empress at the Imperial Palace
where thousands came to watch. Einstein later gave his impressions of
the Japanese in a letter to his sons::307 "Of all the people I
have met, I like the Japanese most, as they are modest, intelligent,
considerate, and have a feel for art.":308

On his return voyage, he also visited Palestine for 12 days in what
would become his only visit to that region. "He was greeted with great
British pomp, as if he were a head of state rather than a theoretical
physicist", writes Isaacson. This included a cannon salute upon his
arrival at the residence of the British high commissioner, Sir Herbert
Samuel. During one reception given to him, the building was "stormed
by throngs who wanted to hear him". In Einstein's talk to the
audience, he expressed his happiness over the event:

I consider this the greatest day of my life. Before, I have always
found something to regret in the Jewish soul, and that is the
forgetfulness of its own people. Today, I have been made happy by the
sight of the Jewish people learning to recognize themselves and to
make themselves recognized as a force in the world.:308

Emigration from Germany

In 1933, Einstein decided to emigrate to the United States due to the
rise to power of the Nazis under Germany's new chancellor, Adolf
Hitler. While visiting American universities in April, 1933, he
learned that the new German government had passed a law barring Jews
from holding any official positions, including teaching at
universities. A month later, the Nazi book burnings occurred, with
Einstein's works being among those burnt, and Nazi propaganda minister
Joseph Goebbels proclaimed, "Jewish intellectualism is dead."
Einstein also learned that his name was on a list of assassination
targets, with a "$5,000 bounty on his head". One German magazine
included him in a list of enemies of the German regime with the
phrase, "not yet hanged".

Einstein was undertaking his third two-month visiting professorship at
the California Institute of Technology when Hitler came to power in
Germany. On his return to Europe in March 1933 he resided in Belgium
for some months, before temporarily moving to England.

He took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton, New Jersey, an affiliation that lasted until his death
in 1955. There, he tried to develop a unified field theory and to
refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics, both
unsuccessfully. He and Kurt Gödel, another Institute member, became
close friends. They would take long walks together discussing their
work. His last assistant was Bruria Kaufman, who later became a
renowned physicist.

Other scientists also fled to America. Among them were Nobel laureates
and professors of theoretical physics. With so many other Jewish
scientists now forced by circumstances to live in America, often
working side by side, Einstein wrote to a friend, "For me the most
beautiful thing is to be in contact with a few fine Jews—a few
millennia of a civilized past do mean something after all." In another
letter he writes, "In my whole life I have never felt so Jewish as
now."

World War II and the Manhattan Project

In 1939, a group of Hungarian scientists that included Hungarian
emigre physicist Leó Szilárd attempted to alert Washington of ongoing
Nazi atomic bomb research. The group's warnings were discounted.

In the summer of 1939, a few months before the beginning of World War
II in Europe, Einstein was persuaded to lend his prestige by writing a
letter, with Leó Szilárd, to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, in order
to alert him of the possibility that Nazi Germany might be developing
an atomic bomb. At the same time, the letter recommended that the
U.S. government should pay attention to and become directly involved
with uranium research, and associated chain reaction
research. Einstein and Szilárd, along with other refugees such as
Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner, "regarded it as their responsibility
to alert Americans to the possibility that German scientists might win
the race to build an atomic bomb, and to warn that Hitler would be
more than willing to resort to such a weapon.":630

The letter is believed to be "arguably the key stimulus for the
U.S. adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the
eve of the U.S. entry into World War II". President Roosevelt
could not take the risk of allowing Hitler to possess atomic bombs
first. As a result of Einstein's letter and his meetings with
Roosevelt, the U.S. entered the "race" to develop the bomb, drawing on
its "immense material, financial, and scientific resources" to
initiate the Manhattan Project. It became the only country to develop
an atomic bomb during World War II.

For Einstein, "war was a disease . . . [and] he called for resistance
to war." But in 1933, after Hitler assumed full power in Germany, "he
renounced pacifism altogether . . . In fact, he urged the Western
powers to prepare themselves against another German
onslaught.":110 In 1954, a year before his death, Einstein said to
his old friend, Linus Pauling, "I made one great mistake in my life —
when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom
bombs be made; but there was some justification — the danger that the
Germans would make them..."

U.S. citizenship

Einstein became an American citizen in 1940. Not long after settling
into his career at Princeton, he expressed his appreciation of the
"meritocracy" in American culture when compared to Europe. According
to Isaacson, he recognized the "right of individuals to say and think
what they pleased", without social barriers, and as result, the
individual was "encouraged" to be more creative, a trait he valued
from his own early education. Einstein writes:

What makes the new arrival devoted to this country is the democratic
trait among the people. No one humbles himself before another person
or class. . . American youth has the good fortune not to have its
outlook troubled by outworn traditions.

As a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People NAACP at Princeton who campaigned for the civil rights of
African Americans, Einstein corresponded with civil rights activist
W. E. B. Du Bois, and in 1946 Einstein called racism America's "worst
disease". He later stated, "Race prejudice has unfortunately
become an American tradition which is uncritically handed down from
one generation to the next. The only remedies are enlightenment and
education".

After the death of Israel's first president, Chaim Weizmann, in
November 1952, Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion offered Einstein the
position of President of Israel, a mostly ceremonial post. The
offer was presented by Israel's ambassador in Washington, Abba Eban,
who explained that the offer "embodies the deepest respect which the
Jewish people can repose in any of its sons".:522 However,
Einstein declined, and wrote in his response that he was "deeply
moved", and "at once saddened and ashamed" that he could not accept
it:

All my life I have dealt with objective matters, hence I lack both the
natural aptitude and the experience to deal properly with people and
to exercise official function. I am the more distressed over these
circumstances because my relationship with the Jewish people became my
strongest human tie once I achieved complete clarity about our
precarious position among the nations of the world.:522

Death

On 17 April 1955, Albert Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused
by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously
been reinforced surgically by Dr. Rudolph Nissen in 1948. He took
the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance
commemorating the State of Israel's seventh anniversary with him to
the hospital, but he did not live long enough to complete it.
Einstein refused surgery, saying: "I want to go when I want. It is
tasteless to prolong life artificially. I have done my share, it is
time to go. I will do it elegantly." He died in Princeton Hospital
early the next morning at the age of 76, having continued to work
until near the end.

Einstein's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered at an
undisclosed location. During the autopsy, the pathologist of
Princeton Hospital, Thomas Stoltz Harvey, removed Einstein's brain for
preservation, without the permission of his family, in hope that the
neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made
Einstein so intelligent. In his lecture at Einstein's memorial,
nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer summarized his impression of him
as a person:

"He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without
worldliness . . . There was always with him a wonderful purity at once
childlike and profoundly stubborn."

Scientific career

Throughout his life, Einstein published hundreds of books and
articles. In addition to the work he did by himself he also
collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including
the Bose–Einstein statistics, the Einstein refrigerator and
others.

Annus Mirabilis papers

The Annus Mirabilis papers are four articles pertaining to the
photoelectric effect (which gave rise to quantum theory), Brownian
motion, the special theory of relativity, and E = mc2 that Albert
Einstein published in the Annalen der Physik scientific journal in
1905. These four works contributed substantially to the foundation of
modern physics and changed views on space, time, and matter. The four
papers are:

Title = Area of focus = Received = Published = Significance

On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation
of Light = Photoelectric effect = 18 March = 9 June = Resolved an
unsolved puzzle by suggesting energy existed in discrete quanta rather
than continuous levels. The theory of quanta was either pivotal to, or
gave rise to, quantum theory.

On the Motion of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid, as
Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat = Brownian motion =
11 May = 18 July = Empirical evidence for the atom, substantial
support to the novel area of statistical physics.

On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies = Special relativity = 30 June
= Sept 26 = Reconciled Maxwell's equations for electricity and
magnetism with the laws of mechanics by introducing major changes to
mechanics close to the speed of light. Hypothesized the speed of light
as being independent of the frame of reference and an "upper limit" on
velocity and information transmission in non-esoteric situations,
discredited the concept of an "luminiferous ether", and the
significance of frames of reference in physics.

Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content? =
Matter–energy equivalence = Sept 27 = 21 Nov = Equivalence of matter
and energy, E = mc2 (and by implication, the ability of gravity-and
matter generally-to "bend" light), the existence of "rest energy", and
the basis of nuclear energy (the conversion of matter to energy by
humans and in the cosmos).

Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics

Albert Einstein's first paper submitted in 1900 to Annalen der
Physik was on capillary attraction. It was published in 1901 titled
Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen, which was translated
as "Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena". Two papers he
published in 1902–1903 (thermodynamics) attempted to interpret atomic
phenomena from a statistical point of view. These papers were the
foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion. These published
calculations (1905) showed that Brownian movement can be construed as
firm evidence that molecules exist. His research in 1903 and 1904 was
mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion
phenomena.

General principles postulated by Einstein

He articulated the principle of relativity. This was understood by
Hermann Minkowski to be a generalization of rotational invariance from
space to space-time. Other principles postulated by Einstein and later
vindicated are the principle of equivalence and the principle of
adiabatic invariance of the quantum number.

Theory of relativity and E = mc2

Einstein's "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper" ("On the
Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies") was received on 30 June 1905 and
published 26 September of that same year. It reconciles Maxwell's
equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics, by
introducing major changes to mechanics close to the speed of
light. This later became known as Einstein's special theory of
relativity.

Consequences of this include the time-space frame of a moving body
slowing down and contracting (in the direction of motion) relative to
the frame of the observer. This paper also argued that the idea of a
luminiferous aether – one of the leading theoretical entities in
physics at the time – was superfluous.

In his paper on mass–energy equivalence Einstein produced E = mc2 from
his special relativity equations. Einstein's 1905 work on
relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by
leading physicists, starting with Max Planck.

Photons and energy quanta

In a 1905 paper, Einstein postulated that light itself consists of
localized particles (quanta). Einstein's light quanta were nearly
universally rejected by all physicists, including Max Planck and Niels
Bohr. This idea only became universally accepted in 1919, with Robert
Millikan's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect, and with
the measurement of Compton scattering.

Einstein concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a
collection of photons with energy hf each, where h is Planck's
constant. He does not say much more, because he is not sure how the
particles are related to the wave. But he does suggest that this idea
would explain certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric
effect.

Quantized atomic vibrations

In 1907 Einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a
lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator. In the
Einstein model, each atom oscillates independently – a series of
equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator. Einstein was
aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be
different, but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a
particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve
the specific heat problem in classical mechanics. Peter Debye refined
this model.

Adiabatic principle and action-angle variables

Throughout the 1910s, quantum mechanics expanded in scope to cover
many different systems. After Ernest Rutherford discovered the nucleus
and proposed that electrons orbit like planets, Niels Bohr was able to
show that the same quantum mechanical postulates introduced by Planck
and developed by Einstein would explain the discrete motion of
electrons in atoms, and the periodic table of the elements.

Einstein contributed to these developments by linking them with the
1898 arguments Wilhelm Wien had made. Wien had shown that the
hypothesis of adiabatic invariance of a thermal equilibrium state
allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived
from one another by a simple shifting process. Einstein noted in 1911
that the same adiabatic principle shows that the quantity which is
quantized in any mechanical motion must be an adiabatic
invariant. Arnold Sommerfeld identified this adiabatic invariant as
the action variable of classical mechanics. The law that the action
variable is quantized was a basic principle of the quantum theory as
it was known between 1900 and 1925.

Wave–particle duality

Although the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner
Second Class in 1906, he had not given up on academia. In 1908, he
became a privatdozent at the University of Bern. In "über die
Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution
der Strahlung" ("The Development of Our Views on the Composition and
Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of light, and in an
earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's energy quanta
must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as
independent, point-like particles. This paper introduced the photon
concept (although the name photon was introduced later by Gilbert
N. Lewis in 1926) and inspired the notion of wave–particle duality in
quantum mechanics.

Theory of critical opalescence

Einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations, giving
a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical
point. Ordinarily the density fluctuations are controlled by the
second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density. At
the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large
fluctuations. The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all
wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white. Einstein
relates this to Raleigh scattering, which is what happens when the
fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength, and which
explains why the sky is blue. Einstein quantitatively derived
critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and
demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate
from the atomistic constitution of matter.

Zero-point energy

Main article: Zero-point energy

Einstein's physical intuition led him to note that Planck's oscillator
energies had an incorrect zero point. He modified Planck's hypothesis
by stating that the lowest energy state of an oscillator is equal to
1⁄2hf, to half the energy spacing between levels. This argument, which
was made in 1913 in collaboration with Otto Stern, was based on the
thermodynamics of a diatomic molecule which can split apart into two
free atoms.

General relativity and the Equivalence Principle

General relativity (GR) is a theory of gravitation that was developed
by Albert Einstein between 1907 and 1915. According to general
relativity, the observed gravitational attraction between masses
results from the warping of space and time by those masses. General
relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern
astrophysics. It provides the foundation for the current understanding
of black holes, regions of space where gravitational attraction is so
strong that not even light can escape.

As Albert Einstein later said, the reason for the development of
general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within
special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the
outset prefers no state of motion (even accelerated ones) should
appear more satisfactory. So in 1908 he published an article on
acceleration under special relativity. In that article, he argued that
free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a freefalling
observer the rules of special relativity must apply. This argument is
called the Equivalence principle. In the same article, Einstein also
predicted the phenomenon of gravitational time dilation. In 1911,
Einstein published another article expanding on the 1907 article, in
which additional effects such as the deflection of light by massive
bodies were predicted.

Hole argument and Entwurf theory

While developing general relativity, Einstein became confused about
the gauge invariance in the theory. He formulated an argument that led
him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is
impossible. He gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor
equations, and searched for equations that would be invariant under
general linear transformations only.

In June, 1913 the Entwurf ("draft") theory was the result of these
investigations. As its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory,
with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing
conditions. Simultaneously less elegant and more difficult than
general relativity, after more than two years of intensive work
Einstein abandoned the theory in November, 1915 after realizing that
the hole argument was mistaken.

Cosmology

In 1917, Einstein applied the General theory of relativity to model
the structure of the universe as a whole. He wanted the universe to be
eternal and unchanging, but this type of universe is not consistent
with relativity. To fix this, Einstein modified the general theory by
introducing a new notion, the cosmological constant. With a positive
cosmological constant, the universe could be an eternal static
sphere.

Einstein believed a spherical static universe is philosophically preferred, because it would obey Mach's principle. He had shown that general relativity incorporates Mach's principle to a certain extent in frame dragging by gravitomagnetic fields, but he knew that Mach's idea would not work if space goes on forever. In a closed universe, he believed that Mach's principle would hold. Mach's principle has generated much controversy over the years.

Modern quantum theory

In 1917, at the height of his work on relativity, Einstein published
an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility
of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the
maser and the laser. This article showed that the statistics of
absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with
Planck's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n
photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of
light into an empty mode. This paper was enormously influential in the
later development of quantum mechanics, because it was the first paper
to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple
laws. Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie's work, and supported his
ideas, which were received skeptically at first. In another major
paper from this era, Einstein gave a wave equation for de Broglie
waves, which Einstein suggested was the Hamilton–Jacobi equation of
mechanics. This paper would inspire Schrödinger's work of 1926.

Bose–Einstein statistics

In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from
Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that
assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable
particles. Einstein noted that Bose's statistics applied to some atoms
as well as to the proposed light particles, and submitted his
translation of Bose's paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik. Einstein
also published his own articles describing the model and its
implications, among them the Bose–Einstein condensate phenomenon that
some particulates should appear at very low temperatures. It was
not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced
experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using
ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST–JILA laboratory at the
University of Colorado at Boulder. Bose–Einstein statistics are
now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of
bosons. Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the
Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University.

Energy momentum pseudotensor

General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime, so it is difficult
to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum. Noether's
theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian
with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation
invariance into something of a gauge symmetry. The energy and momentum
derived within general relativity by Noether's presecriptions do not
make a real tensor for this reason.

Einstein argued that this is true for fundamental reasons, because the
gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of
coordinates. He maintained that the non-covariant energy momentum
pseudotensor was in fact the best description of the energy momentum
distribution in a gravitational field. This approach has been echoed
by Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, and others, and has become
standard.

The use of non-covariant objects like pseudotensors was heavily
criticized in 1917 by Erwin Schrödinger and others.

Unified field theory

Following his research on general relativity, Einstein entered into a
series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation
to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity. In
1950, he described his "unified field theory" in a Scientific American
article entitled "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation".
Although he continued to be lauded for his work, Einstein became
increasingly isolated in his research, and his efforts were ultimately
unsuccessful. In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental
forces, Einstein ignored some mainstream developments in physics, most
notably the strong and weak nuclear forces, which were not well
understood until many years after his death. Mainstream physics, in
turn, largely ignored Einstein's approaches to unification. Einstein's
dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity motivates modern
quests for a theory of everything and in particular string theory,
where geometrical fields emerge in a unified quantum-mechanical
setting.

Wormholes

Einstein collaborated with others to produce a model of a
wormhole. His motivation was to model elementary particles with charge
as a solution of gravitational field equations, in line with the
program outlined in the paper "Do Gravitational Fields play an
Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary
Particles?". These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes
to make a bridge between two patches.

If one end of a wormhole was positively charged, the other end would
be negatively charged. These properties led Einstein to believe that
pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way.

Einstein–Cartan theory

In order to incorporate spinning point particles into general
relativity, the affine connection needed to be generalized to include
an antisymmetric part, called the torsion. This modification was made
by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s.

Equations of motion

The theory of general relativity has a fundamental law – the Einstein
equations which describe how space curves, the geodesic equation which
describes how particles move may be derived from the Einstein
equations.

Since the equations of general relativity are non-linear, a lump of
energy made out of pure gravitational fields, like a black hole, would
move on a trajectory which is determined by the Einstein equations
themselves, not by a new law. So Einstein proposed that the path of a
singular solution, like a black hole, would be determined to be a
geodesic from general relativity itself.

This was established by Einstein, Infeld, and Hoffmann for pointlike
objects without angular momentum, and by Roy Kerr for spinning
objects.

Other investigations

Einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and
abandoned. These pertain to force, superconductivity, gravitational
waves, and other research. Please see the main article for details.

Collaboration with other scientists

In addition to long time collaborators Leopold Infeld, Nathan Rosen,
Peter Bergmann and others, Einstein also had some one-shot
collaborations with various scientists.

Einstein-de Haas experiment

Einstein and De Haas demonstrated that magnetization is due to the
motion of electrons, nowadays known to be the spin. In order to show
this, they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a
torsion pendulum. They confirmed that this leads the bar to rotate,
because the electron's angular momentum changes as the magnetization
changes. This experiment needed to be sensitive, because the angular
momentum associated with electrons is small, but it definitively
established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for
magnetization.

Schrödinger gas model

Einstein suggested to Erwin Schrödinger that he might be able to
reproduce the statistics of a Bose–Einstein gas by considering a
box. Then to each possible quantum motion of a particle in a box
associate an independent harmonic oscillator. Quantizing these
oscillators, each level will have an integer occupation number, which
will be the number of particles in it.

This formulation is a form of second quantization, but it predates
modern quantum mechanics. Erwin Schrödinger applied this to derive the
thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas. Schrödinger
urged Einstein to add his name as co-author, although Einstein
declined the invitation.

Einstein refrigerator

In 1926, Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd co-invented (and
in 1930, patented) the Einstein refrigerator. This absorption
refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and
using only heat as an input. On 11 November 1930, U.S. Patent
1,781,541 was awarded to Albert Einstein and Leó Szilárd for the
refrigerator. Their invention was not immediately put into commercial
production, as the most promising of their patents were quickly bought
up by the Swedish company Electrolux to protect its refrigeration
technology from competition.

Bohr versus Einstein

The Bohr–Einstein debates were a series of public disputes about
quantum mechanics between Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr who were two
of its founders. Their debates are remembered because of their
importance to the philosophy of science.

Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox

In 1935, Einstein returned to the question of quantum mechanics. He
considered how a measurement on one of two entangled particles would
affect the other. He noted, along with his collaborators, that by
performing different measurements on the distant particle, either of
position or momentum, different properties of the entangled partner
could be discovered without disturbing it in any way.

He then used a hypothesis of local realism to conclude that the other
particle had these properties already determined. The principle he
proposed is that if it is possible to determine what the answer to a
position or momentum measurement would be, without in any way
disturbing the particle, then the particle actually has values of
position or momentum.

This principle distilled the essence of Einstein's objection to
quantum mechanics. As a physical principle, it was shown to be
incorrect when the Aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed Bell's theorem,
which had been promulgated in 1964.

Political and religious views

Albert Einstein, seen here with his wife Elsa Einstein and Zionist
leaders, including future President of Israel Chaim Weizmann, his wife
Dr. Vera Weizmann, Menahem Ussishkin, and Ben-Zion Mossinson on
arrival in New York City in 1921.

Albert Einstein's political views emerged publicly in the middle of
the 20th century due to his fame and reputation for genius. Einstein
offered to and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters
often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics.

Einstein's views on religious belief have been collected from
interviews and original writings. These views covered theological
determinism, agnosticism, humanism along with ethical culture, opting
for Spinoza's god over belief in a personal god, religious belief,
enlightenment and liberation, Jews, Christianity, Jesus, Pope Pius
XII, and the Catholic Church.

Non-scientific legacy

While travelling, Einstein wrote daily to his wife Elsa and adopted
stepdaughters Margot and Ilse. The letters were included in the papers
bequeathed to The Hebrew University. Margot Einstein permitted the
personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested
that it not be done until twenty years after her death (she died in
1986). Barbara Wolff, of The Hebrew University's Albert Einstein
Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private
correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.

Einstein bequeathed the royalties from use of his image to The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem. Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman
Agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent
for the university.

In popular culture

In the period before World War II, Einstein was so well-known in
America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him
to explain "that theory". He finally figured out a way to handle the
incessant inquiries. He told his inquirers "Pardon me, sorry! Always I
am mistaken for Professor Einstein."

Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels,
films, plays, and works of music. He is a favorite model for
depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors; his
expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and
exaggerated. TIME magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was
"a cartoonist's dream come true".

Awards and honors

Einstein merited awards and honors, including the Nobel Prize in
Physics.

+
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.
This text was extracted from the Wikipedia article last modified on 23 June 2011 at 01:51 UTC.
% ese ee
