
James Clerk Maxwell

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

James Clerk Maxwell of Glenlair FRS FRS, 13 June 1831 – 5 November
1879, was a Scottish physicist and mathematician. His most prominent
achievement was formulating classical electromagnetic theory. This
united all previously unrelated observations, experiments and
equations of electricity, magnetism and even optics into a consistent
theory. Maxwell's equations demonstrated that electricity, magnetism
and even light are all manifestations of the same phenomenon, namely
the electromagnetic field. Subsequently, all other classic laws or
equations of these disciplines became simplified cases of Maxwell's
equations. Maxwell's achievements concerning electromagnetism have
been called the "second great unification in physics", after the first
one realised by Isaac Newton. He was the first cousin of notable 19th
century artist Jemima Blackburn.

Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic fields travel through
space in the form of waves, and at the constant speed of light. In
1865 Maxwell published A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic
Field. It was with this that he first proposed that light was in fact
undulations in the same medium that is the cause of electric and
magnetic phenomena. His work in producing a unified model of
electromagnetism is one of the greatest advances in physics.

Maxwell also helped develop the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, which
is a statistical means of describing aspects of the kinetic theory of
gases. These two discoveries helped usher in the era of modern
physics, laying the foundation for such fields as special relativity
and quantum mechanics.

Maxwell is also known for presenting the first durable colour
photograph in 1861 and for his foundational work on the rigidity of
rod-and-joint frameworks like those in many bridges.

Maxwell is considered by many physicists to be the 19th-century
scientist who had the greatest influence on 20th-century physics. His
contributions to the science are considered by many to be of the same
magnitude as those of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein. In the
millennium poll—a survey of the 100 most prominent physicists—Maxwell
was voted the third greatest physicist of all time, behind only Newton
and Einstein. On the centennial of Maxwell's birthday, Einstein
himself described Maxwell's work as the "most profound and the most
fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton."
Einstein kept a photograph of Maxwell on his study wall, alongside
pictures of Michael Faraday and Newton.

Life

Early life, 1831–39

James Clerk Maxwell was born 13 June 1831 at 14 India Street,
Edinburgh, to John Clerk, an advocate, and Frances Cay. Maxwell's
father was a man of comfortable means, related to the Clerk family of
Penicuik, Midlothian, holders of the baronetcy of Clerk of Penicuik;
his brother being the 6th Baronet. He had been born John Clerk, adding
the surname Maxwell to his own after he inherited a country estate in
Middlebie, Kirkcudbrightshire from connections to the Maxwell family,
themselves members of the peerage.

Maxwell's parents did not meet and marry until they were well into
their thirties, which was unusual for the time; moreover, his mother
was nearly 40 years old when James was born. They had had one earlier
child, a daughter, Elizabeth, who died in infancy. They named their
only surviving child James, a name that had sufficed not only for his
grandfather, but also many of his other ancestors.

When Maxwell was young his family moved to Glenlair House, which his
parents had built on the 1500 acre (6.1 km2) Middlebie estate. All
indications suggest that Maxwell had maintained an unquenchable
curiosity from an early age. By the age of three, everything that
moved, shone, or made a noise drew the question: "what's the go o'
that?". In a passage added to a letter from his father to his
sister-in-law Jane Cay in 1834, his mother described this innate sense
of inquisitiveness:

"He is a very happy man, and has improved much since the weather got
moderate; he has great work with doors, locks, keys, etc., and "show
me how it doos" is never out of his mouth. He also investigates the
hidden course of streams and bell-wires, the way the water gets from
the pond through the wall..."

Education, 1839–47

Recognising the potential of the young boy, his mother Frances took
responsibility for James' early education, which in the Victorian era
was largely the job of the woman of the house. She was however taken
ill with abdominal cancer, and after an unsuccessful operation, died
in December 1839 when Maxwell was only eight. James' education was
then overseen by John Maxwell and his sister-in-law Jane, both of whom
played pivotal roles in the life of Maxwell. His formal schooling
began unsuccessfully under the guidance of a sixteen-year-old hired
tutor. Little is known about the young man John Maxwell hired to
instruct his son, except that he treated the younger boy harshly,
chiding him for being slow and wayward. John Maxwell dismissed the
tutor in November 1841, and after considerable thought, sent James to
the prestigious Edinburgh Academy. He lodged during term times at the
house of his aunt Isabella. During this time his passion for drawing
was encouraged by his older cousin Jemima, who was herself a talented
artist.

The ten-year-old Maxwell, having been raised in isolation on his
father's countryside estate, did not fit in well at school. The first
year had been full, obliging him to join the second year with
classmates a year his senior. His mannerisms and Galloway accent
struck the other boys as rustic, and his having arrived on his first
day of school wearing a pair of homemade shoes and a tunic, earned him
the unkind nickname of "Daftie". Maxwell, however, never seemed to
have resented the epithet, bearing it without complaint for many
years. Social isolation at the Academy ended when he met Lewis
Campbell and Peter Guthrie Tait, two boys of a similar age who were to
become notable scholars later in life. They would remain lifetime
friends.

Maxwell was fascinated by geometry at an early age, rediscovering the
regular polyhedron before any formal instruction. Much of his talent
however, went overlooked, and despite winning the school's scripture
biography prize in his second year his academic work remained
unnoticed until, at the age of 13, he won the school's mathematical
medal and first prize for both English and poetry.

Maxwell wrote his first scientific paper at the age of 14. In it he
described a mechanical means of drawing mathematical curves with a
piece of twine, and the properties of ellipses, Cartesian ovals, and
related curves with more than two foci. His work, Oval Curves, was
presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh by James Forbes, who was a
professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University. Maxwell was
deemed too young for the work presented. The work was not entirely
original, since Descartes had also examined the properties of such
multifocal curves in the seventeenth century, but Maxwell had
simplified their construction.

Edinburgh University, 1847–50

Maxwell left the Academy in 1847 at the age of 16 and began attending
classes at the University of Edinburgh. Having had the opportunity to
attend the University of Cambridge after his first term Maxwell
instead decided to complete the full course of his undergraduate
studies at Edinburgh. The academic staff of Edinburgh University
included some highly regarded names, and Maxwell's first year tutors
included Sir William Hamilton, who lectured him on logic and
metaphysics, Philip Kelland on mathematics, and James Forbes on
natural philosophy. Maxwell, however, did not find his classes at
Edinburgh University very demanding, and was therefore able to immerse
himself in private study during free time at the university, and
particularly when back home at Glenlair. There he would experiment
with improvised chemical, electric, and magnetic apparatuses, but his
chief concerns regarded the properties of polarized light. He
constructed shaped blocks of gelatine, subjected them to various
stresses, and with a pair of polarizing prisms given to him by the
famous scientist William Nicol he would view the coloured fringes
which had developed within the jelly. Through this practice Maxwell
discovered photoelasticity, which is a means of determining the stress
distribution within physical structures.

Maxwell contributed two papers for the Transactions of the Royal
Society of Edinburgh at the age of 18. One of these, On the
equilibrium of elastic solids, laid the foundation for an important
discovery later in his life, which was the temporary double refraction
produced in viscous liquids by shear stress. His other paper was
titled Rolling curves, and just as with the paper Oval Curves that he
had written at the Edinburgh Academy, Maxwell was again considered too
young to stand at the rostrum and present it himself. The paper was
delivered to the Royal Society by his tutor Kelland instead.

Cambridge University, 1850–56

In October 1850, already an accomplished mathematician, Maxwell left
Scotland for Cambridge University. He initially attended Peterhouse,
but before the end of his first term transferred to Trinity College,
where he believed it would be easier to obtain a fellowship. At
Trinity, he was elected to the elite secret society known as the
Cambridge Apostles. In November 1851, Maxwell studied under William
Hopkins, whose success in nurturing mathematical genius had earned him
the nickname of "senior wrangler-maker". A considerable part of
Maxwell's translation of his equations regarding electromagnetism was
accomplished during his time at Trinity.

In 1854, Maxwell graduated from Trinity with a degree in
mathematics. He scored second highest in the final examination, coming
behind Edward Routh, and thereby earning himself the title of Second
Wrangler. He was later declared equal with Routh, however, in the more
exacting ordeal of the Smith's Prize examination. Immediately after
earning his degree, Maxwell read a novel paper to the Cambridge
Philosophical Society entitled On the transformation of surfaces by
bending. This is one of the few purely mathematical papers he had
written, and it demonstrated Maxwell's growing stature as a
mathematician. Maxwell decided to remain at Trinity after graduating
and applied for a fellowship, which was a process that he could expect
to take a couple of years. Buoyed by his success as a research
student, he would be free, aside from some tutoring and examining
duties, to pursue scientific interests at his own leisure.

The nature and perception of colour was one such interest, and had
begun at Edinburgh University while he was a student of
Forbes. Maxwell took the coloured spinning tops invented by Forbes,
and was able to demonstrate that white light would result from a
mixture of red, green and blue light. His paper, Experiments on
colour, laid out the principles of colour combination, and was
presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in March 1855. Fortunately
for Maxwell this time it would be he himself who delivered his
lecture.

Maxwell was made a fellow of Trinity on 10 October 1855, sooner than
was the norm, and was asked to prepare lectures on hydrostatics and
optics, and to set examination papers. However, the following February
he was urged by Forbes to apply for the newly vacant Chair of Natural
Philosophy at Marischal College, Aberdeen. His father assisted him in
the task of preparing the necessary references, but he would die on 2
April, at Glenlair before either knew the result of Maxwell's
candidacy. Maxwell nevertheless accepted the professorship at
Aberdeen, leaving Cambridge in November 1856.

Aberdeen University, 1856–60

The 25-year-old Maxwell was a decade and a half younger than any other
professor at Marischal, but engaged himself with his new
responsibilities as head of department, devising the syllabus and
preparing lectures. He committed himself to lecturing 15 hours a week,
including a weekly pro bono lecture to the local working men's
college. He lived in Aberdeen during the six months of the academic
year, and spent the summers at Glenlair, which he had inherited from
his father.

His mind was focused on a problem that had eluded scientists for two
hundred years: the nature of Saturn's rings. It was unknown how they
could remain stable without breaking up, drifting away or crashing
into Saturn. The problem took on a particular resonance at this time
as St John's College, Cambridge had chosen it as the topic for the
1857 Adams Prize. Maxwell devoted two years to studying the problem,
proving that a regular solid ring could not be stable, and a fluid
ring would be forced by wave action to break up into blobs. Since
neither was observed, Maxwell concluded that the rings must comprise
numerous small particles he called "brick-bats", each independently
orbiting Saturn. Maxwell was awarded the £130 Adams Prize in 1859 for
his essay On the stability of Saturn's rings; he was the only entrant
to have made enough headway to submit an entry. His work was so
detailed and convincing that when George Biddell Airy read it he
commented "It is one of the most remarkable applications of
mathematics to physics that I have ever seen." It was considered the
final word on the issue until direct observations by the Voyager
flybys of the 1980s confirmed Maxwell's prediction. Maxwell would also
go on to disprove mathematically the nebular hypothesis (which stated
that the solar system formed through the progressive condensation of a
purely gaseous nebula), forcing the theory to account for additional
portions of small solid particles.

In 1857 Maxwell befriended the Reverend Daniel Dewar, who was the
Principal of Marischal, and through him met Dewar's daughter,
Katherine Mary Dewar. They were engaged in February 1858 and married
in Aberdeen on 2 June 1859. Comparatively little is known of
Katherine, seven years Maxwell's senior. Maxwell's biographer and
friend Campbell adopted an uncharacteristic reticence on the subject,
though describing their married life as "one of unexampled devotion".

In 1860, Marischal College merged with the neighbouring King's College
to form the University of Aberdeen. There was no room for two
professors of Natural Philosophy, and Maxwell, despite his scientific
reputation, found himself laid off. He was unsuccessful in applying
for Forbes' recently vacated chair at Edinburgh, the post instead
going to Tait. Maxwell was granted the Chair of Natural Philosophy at
King's College London instead. After recovering from a near-fatal bout
of smallpox in the summer of 1860, Maxwell headed south to London with
his wife Katherine.

King's College London, 1860–65

Maxwell's time at King's was probably the most productive of his
career. He was awarded the Royal Society's Rumford Medal in 1860 for
his work on colour, and was later elected to the Society in 1861. This
period of his life would see him display the world's first light-fast
colour photograph, further develop his ideas on the viscosity of
gases, and propose a system of defining physical quantities—now known
as dimensional analysis. Maxwell would often attend lectures at the
Royal Institution, where he came into regular contact with Michael
Faraday. The relationship between the two men could not be described
as close, as Faraday was 40 years Maxwell's senior and showed signs of
senility. They nevertheless maintained a strong respect for each
other's talents.

This time is especially known for the advances Maxwell made in the
fields of electricity and magnetism. He had examined the nature of
both electric and magnetic fields in his two-part paper On physical
lines of force, published in 1861, in which he had provided a
conceptual model for electromagnetic induction, consisting of tiny
spinning cells of magnetic flux. Two more parts later added to the
paper were published in early 1862. In the first of these he discussed
the nature of electrostatics and displacement current. The final part
dealt with the rotation of the plane of polarization of light in a
magnetic field, a phenomenon discovered by Faraday and now known as
the Faraday effect.

Later years

In 1865, Maxwell resigned the chair at King's College London and
returned to Glenlair with Katherine.

He wrote a textbook entitled Theory of Heat (1871), and an elementary
treatise, Matter and Motion (1876). Maxwell was also the first to make
explicit use of dimensional analysis, in 1871.

In 1871, he became the first Cavendish Professor of Physics at
Cambridge. Maxwell was put in charge of the development of the
Cavendish Laboratory. He supervised every step in the progress of the
building and of the purchase of the very valuable collection of
apparatus paid for by its generous founder, the 7th Duke of Devonshire
(chancellor of the university, and one of its most distinguished
alumni). One of Maxwell's last great contributions to science was the
editing (with copious original notes) of the electrical researches of
Henry Cavendish, from which it appeared that Cavendish researched,
amongst other things, such questions as the mean density of the earth
and the composition of water.

He died in Cambridge of abdominal cancer on 5 November 1879 at the age
of 48. His mother had died at the same age of the same type of
cancer. Maxwell is buried at Parton Kirk, near Castle Douglas in
Galloway, Scotland. The extended biography The Life of James Clerk
Maxwell, by his former schoolfellow and lifelong friend Professor
Lewis Campbell, was published in 1882. His collected works, including
the series of articles on the properties of matter, such as "Atom",
"Attraction", "Capillary action", "Diffusion", "Ether", etc., were
issued in two volumes by the Cambridge University Press in 1890.

Personality

As a great lover of Scottish poetry, Maxwell memorised poems and wrote
his own. The best known is Rigid Body Sings, closely based on Comin'
Through the Rye by Robert Burns, which he apparently used to sing
while accompanying himself on a guitar. It has the immortal opening
lines

Gin a body meet a body

Flyin' through the air.

Gin a body hit a body,

Will it fly? And where?

A collection of his poems was published by his friend Lewis Campbell
in 1882.

Ivan Tolstoy, author of one of Maxwell's biographies, remarked at the
frequency with which scientists writing short biographies on Maxwell
often omit the subject of his Christianity. He was an evangelical
Presbyterian, and in his later years became an Elder of the Church of
Scotland. Maxwell's religious beliefs and related activities have been
the focus of several peer-reviewed and well-referenced
papers. Attending both Church of Scotland (his father's denomination)
and Episcopalian (his mother's denomination) services as a child,
Maxwell later underwent an evangelical conversion in April 1853, which
committed him to an anti-positivist position.

Contributions

Electromagnetism

Maxwell had studied and commented on the field of electricity and
magnetism as early as 1855/6 when "On Faraday's lines of force" was
read to the Cambridge Philosophical Society. The paper presented a
simplified model of Faraday's work, and how the two phenomena were
related. He reduced all of the current knowledge into a linked set of
differential equations with 20 equations in 20 variables. This work
was later published as "On physical lines of force" in March 1861.

Around 1862, while lecturing at King's College, Maxwell calculated
that the speed of propagation of an electromagnetic field is
approximately that of the speed of light. He considered this to be
more than just a coincidence, and commented "We can scarcely avoid the
conclusion that light consists in the transverse undulations of the
same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena."

Working on the problem further, Maxwell showed that the equations
predict the existence of waves of oscillating electric and magnetic
fields that travel through empty space at a speed that could be
predicted from simple electrical experiments; using the data available
at the time, Maxwell obtained a velocity of 310,740,000 m/s. In his
1864 paper "A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field", Maxwell
wrote, "The agreement of the results seems to show that light and
magnetism are affections of the same substance, and that light is an
electromagnetic disturbance propagated through the field according to
electromagnetic laws".

His famous equations, in their modern form of four partial
differential equations, first appeared in fully developed form in his
textbook A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism in 1873. Most of this
work was done by Maxwell at Glenlair during the period between holding
his London post and his taking up the Cavendish chair. Maxwell
expressed electromagnetism in the algebra of quaternions and made the
electromagnetic potential the centerpiece of his theory. In 1881
Oliver Heaviside replaced Maxwell’s electromagnetic potential field by
‘force fields’ as the centerpiece of electromagnetic theory. Heaviside
reduced the complexity of Maxwell’s theory down to four differential
equations, known now collectively as Maxwell's Laws or Maxwell's
equations. According to Heaviside, the electromagnetic potential field
was arbitrary and needed to be "murdered". A few years later there was
a great debate between Heaviside and Peter Guthrie Tait about the
relative merits of vector analysis and quaternions. The result was the
realization that there was no need for the greater physical insights
provided by quaternions if the theory was purely local, and vector
analysis became commonplace.

Maxwell was proven correct, and his quantitative connection between
light and electromagnetism is considered one of the great
accomplishments of 19th century mathematical physics.

Maxwell also introduced the concept of the electromagnetic field in
comparison to force lines that Faraday discovered. By understanding
the propagation of electromagnetism as a field emitted by active
particles, Maxwell could advance his work on light. At that time,
Maxwell believed that the propagation of light required a medium for
the waves, dubbed the luminiferous aether. Over time, the existence of
such a medium, permeating all space and yet apparently undetectable by
mechanical means, proved more and more difficult to reconcile with
experiments such as the Michelson–Morley experiment. Moreover, it
seemed to require an absolute frame of reference in which the
equations were valid, with the distasteful result that the equations
changed form for a moving observer. These difficulties inspired Albert
Einstein to formulate the theory of special relativity, and in the
process Einstein dispensed with the requirement of a luminiferous
aether.

Colour analysis

Maxwell contributed to the field of optics and the study of colour
vision, creating the foundation for practical colour photography.

From 1855 to 1872, he published at intervals a series of valuable
investigations concerning the perception of colour, colour-blindness
and colour theory, for the earlier of which the Royal Society awarded
him the Rumford Medal. The instruments which he devised for these
investigations were simple and convenient to use. For example,
Maxwell's discs were used to compare a variable mixture of three
primary colours with a sample colour by observing the spinning "colour
top."

In the course of his 1855 paper on the perception of colour, Maxwell
proposed that if three black-and-white photographs of a scene were
taken through red, green and violet filters, and transparent prints of
the images were projected onto a screen using three projectors
equipped with similar filters, when superimposed on the screen the
result would be perceived by the human eye as a complete reproduction
of all the colours in the scene.

During an 1861 Royal Institution lecture on colour theory, Maxwell
presented the world's first demonstration of colour photography by
this principle of three-colour analysis and synthesis, the basis of
nearly all subsequent photochemical and electronic methods of colour
photography. Thomas Sutton, inventor of the single-lens reflex camera,
did the actual picture-taking. He photographed a tartan ribbon three
times, through red, green and blue filters. He also made a fourth
exposure through a yellow filter, but according to Maxwell's account
this was not used in the demonstration. Because Sutton's photographic
plates were in fact insensitive to red and barely sensitive to green,
the results of this pioneering experiment were far from perfect. It
was remarked in the published account of the lecture that "if the red
and green images had been as fully photographed as the blue," it
"would have been a truly-coloured image of the riband. By finding
photographic materials more sensitive to the less refrangible rays,
the representation of the colours of objects might be greatly
improved."

Researchers in 1961 concluded that the seemingly impossible partial
success of the red-filtered exposure was due to ultraviolet
light. Some red dyes strongly reflect it, the red filter used does not
entirely block it, and Sutton's plates were sensitive to it.

The demonstration was not of a print or transparency containing
tangible colouring matter, but of colour which was photographically
recorded from nature and reproduced by the same additive colour
synthesis principle now used by all common types of colour video
displays. Maxwell's purpose was not to present a method of colour
photography, but to illustrate the basis of human colour perception
and to show that the correct additive primaries are not red, yellow
and blue, as was then taught, but red, green and blue.

The three photographic plates now reside in a small museum at 14 India
Street, Edinburgh, the house where Maxwell was born.

Kinetic theory and thermodynamics

One of Maxwell's major investigations was on the kinetic theory of
gases. Originating with Daniel Bernoulli, this theory was advanced by
the successive labours of John Herapath, John James Waterston, James
Joule, and particularly Rudolf Clausius, to such an extent as to put
its general accuracy beyond a doubt; but it received enormous
development from Maxwell, who in this field appeared as an
experimenter (on the laws of gaseous friction) as well as a
mathematician.

In 1866, he formulated statistically, independently of Ludwig
Boltzmann, the Maxwell–Boltzmann kinetic theory of gases. His formula,
called the Maxwell distribution, gives the fraction of gas molecules
moving at a specified velocity at any given temperature. In the
kinetic theory, temperatures and heat involve only molecular
movement. This approach generalized the previously established laws of
thermodynamics and explained existing observations and experiments in
a better way than had been achieved previously. Maxwell's work on
thermodynamics led him to devise the Gedankenexperiment (thought
experiment) that came to be known as Maxwell's demon.

In 1871, he established Maxwell's thermodynamic relations, which are
statements of equality among the second derivatives of the
thermodynamic potentials with respect to different thermodynamic
variables. In 1874, he constructed a plaster thermodynamic
visualisation as a way of exploring phase transitions, based on the
American scientist Josiah Willard Gibbs's graphical thermodynamics
papers.

Control theory

Maxwell published a famous paper "On governors" in the Proceedings of
Royal Society, vol. 16 (1867–1868). This paper is quite frequently
considered a classical paper of the early days of control theory. Here
governors refer to the governor or the centrifugal governor used in
steam engines.

Legacy

Maxwell was ranked 91st on the BBC poll of the 100 Greatest
Britons. His name is honoured in a number of ways:

The maxwell (Mx), a compound derived CGS unit measuring magnetic flux.
Maxwell Montes, a mountain range on Venus, one of only three features
on the planet that are not given female names.  The Maxwell Gap in the
Rings of Saturn.  The James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, the largest
submillimetre-wavelength astronomical telescope in the world, with a
diameter of 15 metres.  The 1977 James Clerk Maxwell Building of the
University of Edinburgh, housing the schools of mathematics, physics
and meteorology.  The James Clerk Maxwell building at the Waterloo
campus of King's College London, in commemoration of his time as
Professor of Natural Philosophy at King's from 1860 to 1865. The
university also has a chair in Physics named after him, and a society
for undergraduate physicists.  The £4 million James Clerk Maxwell
Centre of the Edinburgh Academy was opened in 2006 to mark his 175th
anniversary.  James Clerk Maxwell Road in Cambridge, which runs beside
the Cavendish Laboratory.  The University of Salford's main building
is named after him.  Maxwell bridge, a bridge circuit involving
resistors, a capacitor and an inductor A statue on Edinburgh's George
Street A street in Aberdeen's Kincorth area is named after him Thomas
Pynchon, an American novelist, alludes to and explains Maxwell's demon
in The Crying of Lot 49.  P J Moore, keyboard player with The Blue
Nile is developing a theatre piece based on the life of J.C.M.

+
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.
This text was extracted from the Wikipedia article last modified on 27 June 2011 at 20:34 UTC.
% ese ee
