
Isaac Newton

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sir Isaac Newton PRS (25 December 1642 - 20 March 1727) was an English
physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural philosopher, alchemist,
and theologian.

His monograph Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, published
in 1687, lays the foundations for most of classical mechanics. In this
work, Newton described universal gravitation and the three laws of
motion, which dominated the scientific view of the physical universe
for the next three centuries. Newton showed that the motions of
objects on Earth and of celestial bodies are governed by the same set
of natural laws, by demonstrating the consistency between Kepler's
laws of planetary motion and his theory of gravitation, thus removing
the last doubts about heliocentrism and advancing the Scientific
Revolution. The Principia is generally considered to be one of the
most important scientific books ever written.

Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a
theory of colour based on the observation that a prism decomposes
white light into the many colours that form the visible spectrum. He
also formulated an empirical law of cooling and studied the speed of
sound.

In mathematics, Newton shares the credit with Gottfried Leibniz for
the development of differential and integral calculus. He also
demonstrated the generalised binomial theorem, developed Newton's
method for approximating the roots of a function, and contributed to
the study of power series.

Newton was also highly religious. He was an unorthodox Christian, and
wrote more on Biblical hermeneutics and occult studies than on science
and mathematics, the subjects he is mainly associated with. Newton
secretly rejected Trinitarianism, fearing to be accused of refusing
holy orders.

Life

Early life

Isaac Newton was born on what is retroactively considered 4 January
1643 [OS: 25 December 1642] at Woolsthorpe Manor in
Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of
Lincolnshire. At the time of Newton's birth, England had not adopted
the Gregorian calendar and therefore his date of birth was recorded as
Christmas Day, 25 December 1642. Newton was born three months after
the death of his father, a prosperous farmer also named Isaac
Newton. Born prematurely, he was a small child; his mother Hannah
Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug
(about 1.1 litres). When Newton was three, his mother remarried and
went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabus Smith,
leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery
Ayscough. The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and held some enmity
towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a
list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and
mother Smith to burn them and the house over them." While Newton was
once engaged in his late teens to a Miss Storey, he never married,
being highly engrossed in his studies and work.

From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was
educated at The King's School, Grantham (where his alleged signature
can still be seen upon a library window sill). He was removed from
school, and by October 1659, he was to be found at
Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, where his mother, widowed by now for a
second time, attempted to make a farmer of him. He hated farming.
Henry Stokes, master at the King's School, persuaded his mother to
send him back to school so that he might complete his
education. Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a
schoolyard bully, he became the top-ranked student. The Cambridge
psychologist Simon Baron-Cohen considers it "fairly certain" that
Newton suffered from Asperger syndrome.

In June 1661, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge as a sizar
- a sort of work-study role. At that time, the college's teachings
were based on those of Aristotle, but Newton preferred to read the
more advanced ideas of modern philosophers, such as Descartes, and of
astronomers such as Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler. In 1665, he
discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a
mathematical theory that later became infinitesimal calculus. Soon
after Newton had obtained his degree in August 1665, the university
temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague. Although
he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student, Newton's private
studies at his home in Woolsthorpe over the subsequent two years saw
the development of his theories on calculus, optics and the law of
gravitation. In 1667, he returned to Cambridge as a fellow of
Trinity. Fellows were required to become ordained priests, something
Newton desired to avoid due to his unorthodox views. Luckily for
Newton, there was no specific deadline for ordination and it could be
postponed indefinitely. The problem became more severe later when
Newton was elected for the prestigious Lucasian Chair. For such a
significant appointment, ordaining normally could not be
dodged. Nevertheless, Newton managed to avoid it by means of a special
permission from Charles II.

Middle years

Mathematics

Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of
mathematics then studied".

His work on the subject usually referred to as fluxions or calculus is
seen, for example, in a manuscript of October 1666, now published
among Newton's mathematical papers. A related subject was infinite
series. Newton's manuscript "De analysi per aequationes numero
terminorum infinitas" ("On analysis by equations infinite in number of
terms") was sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669: in
August 1669 Barrow identified its author to Collins as "Mr Newton, a
fellow of our College, and very young ... but of an extraordinary
genius and proficiency in these things".

Newton later became involved in a dispute with Leibniz over priority
in the development of infinitesimal calculus. Most modern historians
believe that Newton and Leibniz developed infinitesimal calculus
independently, although with very different notations. Occasionally it
has been suggested that Newton published almost nothing about it until
1693, and did not give a full account until 1704, while Leibniz began
publishing a full account of his methods in 1684. (Leibniz's notation
and "differential Method", nowadays recognised as much more convenient
notations, were adopted by continental European mathematicians, and
after 1820 or so, also by British mathematicians.) Such a suggestion,
however, fails to notice the content of calculus which critics of
Newton's time and modern times have pointed out in Book 1 of Newton's
Principia itself (published 1687) and in its forerunner manuscripts,
such as De motu corporum in gyrum ("On the motion of bodies in
orbit"), of 1684. The Principia is not written in the language of
calculus either as we know it or as Newton's (later) 'dot' notation
would write it. But his work extensively uses an infinitesimal
calculus in geometric form, based on limiting values of the ratios of
vanishing small quantities: in the Principia itself Newton gave
demonstration of this under the name of 'the method of first and last
ratios' and explained why he put his expositions in this form,
remarking also that 'hereby the same thing is performed as by the
method of indivisibles'.

Because of this, the Principia has been called "a book dense with the
theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus" in modern times
and "lequel est presque tout de ce calcul" ('nearly all of it is of
this calculus') in Newton's time. His use of methods involving "one or
more orders of the infinitesimally small" is present in his De motu
corporum in gyrum of 1684 and in his papers on motion "during the two
decades preceding 1684".

Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared
controversy and criticism. He had a very close relationship with Swiss
mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, who from the beginning was
impressed by Newton's gravitational theory. In 1691, Duillier planned
to prepare a new version of Newton's Principia, but never finished
it. However, in 1693 the relationship between the two men changed. At
the time, Duillier had also exchanged several letters with Leibniz.

Starting in 1699, other members of the Royal Society (of which Newton
was a member) accused Leibniz of plagiarism, and the dispute broke out
in full force in 1711. The Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it
was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a
fraud. This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that
Newton himself wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz. Thus
began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and
Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716.

Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem,
valid for any exponent. He discovered Newton's identities, Newton's
method, classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in
two variables), made substantial contributions to the theory of finite
differences, and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ
coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations. He
approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a
precursor to Euler's summation formula), and was the first to use
power series with confidence and to revert power series.

He was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669 on Barrow's
recommendation. In that day, any fellow of Cambridge or Oxford was
required to become an ordained Anglican priest. However, the terms of
the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in
the church (presumably so as to have more time for science). Newton
argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement,
and Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this
argument. Thus a conflict between Newton's religious views and
Anglican orthodoxy was averted.

Optics

From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics. During this period he
investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that a prism could
decompose white light into a spectrum of colours, and that a lens and
a second prism could recompose the multicoloured spectrum into white
light.

He also showed that the coloured light does not change its properties
by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various
objects. Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected or
scattered or transmitted, it stayed the same colour. Thus, he observed
that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured
light rather than objects generating the colour themselves. This is
known as Newton's theory of colour.

From this work, he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope
would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours (chromatic
aberration). As a proof of the concept, he constructed a telescope
using a mirror as the objective to bypass that problem. Building the
design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known
as a Newtonian telescope, involved solving the problem of a suitable
mirror material and shaping technique. Newton ground his own mirrors
out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal, using
Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his
telescopes. In late 1668 he was able to produce this first reflecting
telescope. In 1671, the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his
reflecting telescope. Their interest encouraged him to publish his
notes On Colour, which he later expanded into his Opticks. When Robert
Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that
he withdrew from public debate. Newton and Hooke had brief exchanges
in 1679-80, when Hooke, appointed to manage the Royal Society's
correspondence, opened up a correspondence intended to elicit
contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions, which had the
effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical
form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force
inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector (see
Newton's law of universal gravitation - History and De motu corporum
in gyrum). But the two men remained generally on poor terms until
Hooke's death.

Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which
were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium. He verged on
soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and
transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk.II, Props. 12), but still
retained his theory of ‘fits’ that disposed corpuscles to be reflected
or transmitted (Props.13). Later physicists instead favoured a purely
wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference
patterns, and the general phenomenon of diffraction. Today's quantum
mechanics, photons and the idea of wave-particle duality bear only a
minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.

In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of
the ether to transmit forces between particles. The contact with the
theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy. He replaced
the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and
repulsion between particles. John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of
Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of
the age of reason: He was the last of the magicians." Newton's
interest in alchemy cannot be isolated from his contributions to
science; however, he did apparently abandon his alchemical
researches. (This was at a time when there was no clear distinction
between alchemy and science.) Had he not relied on the occult idea of
action at a distance, across a vacuum, he might not have developed his
theory of gravity. (See also Isaac Newton's occult studies.)

In 1704, Newton published Opticks, in which he expounded his
corpuscular theory of light. He considered light to be made up of
extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser
corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical
transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one
another, ...and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the
Particles of Light which enter their Composition?" Newton also
constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator,
using a glass globe (Optics, 8th Query).

In an article entitled "Newton, prisms, and the 'opticks' of tunable
lasers it is indicated that Newton in his book Opticks was the first
to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander. In the same book
he describes, via diagrams, the use of multiple-prism arrays. Some 278
years after Newton's discussion, multiple-prism expanders became
central to the development of narrow-linewidth tunable lasers. Also,
the use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism
dispersion theory.

Mechanics and gravitation

In 1679, Newton returned to his work on (celestial) mechanics, i.e.,
gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets, with reference to
Kepler's laws of planetary motion. This followed stimulation by a
brief exchange of letters in 1679-80 with Hooke, who had been
appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, and who opened
a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal
Society transactions. Newton's reawakening interest in astronomical
matters received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the
winter of 1680-1681, on which he corresponded with John
Flamsteed. After the exchanges with Hooke, Newton worked out a proof
that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a
centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius
vector (see Newton's law of universal gravitation - History and De
motu corporum in gyrum). Newton communicated his results to Edmond
Halley and to the Royal Society in De motu corporum in gyrum, a tract
written on about 9 sheets which was copied into the Royal Society's
Register Book in December 1684. This tract contained the nucleus that
Newton developed and expanded to form the Principia.

The Principia was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and
financial help from Edmond Halley. In this work, Newton stated the
three universal laws of motion that enabled many of the advances of
the Industrial Revolution which soon followed and were not to be
improved upon for more than 200 years, and are still the underpinnings
of the non-relativistic technologies of the modern world. He used the
Latin word gravitas (weight) for the effect that would become known as
gravity, and defined the law of universal gravitation.

In the same work, Newton presented a calculus-like method of
geometrical analysis by 'first and last ratios', gave the first
analytical determination (based on Boyle's law) of the speed of sound
in air, inferred the oblateness of the spheroidal figure of the Earth,
accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the
Moon's gravitational attraction on the Earth's oblateness, initiated
the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the
moon, provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets,
and much more.

Newton made clear his heliocentric view of the solar system -
developed in a somewhat modern way, because already in the mid-1680s
he recognised the "deviation of the Sun" from the centre of gravity of
the solar system. For Newton, it was not precisely the centre of the
Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest, but rather
"the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the
Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", and this centre of
gravity "either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line"
(Newton adopted the "at rest" alternative in view of common consent
that the centre, wherever it was, was at rest).

Newton's postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast
distances led to him being criticised for introducing "occult
agencies" into science. Later, in the second edition of the Principia
(1713), Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General
Scholium, writing that it was enough that the phenomena implied a
gravitational attraction, as they did; but they did not so far
indicate its cause, and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame
hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomena. (Here
Newton used what became his famous expression Hypotheses non fingo).

With the Principia, Newton became internationally recognised. He
acquired a circle of admirers, including the Swiss-born mathematician
Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, with whom he formed an intense relationship
that lasted until 1693, when it abruptly ended, at the same time that
Newton suffered a nervous breakdown.

Later life

In the 1690s, Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with
the literal interpretation of the Bible. Henry More's belief in the
Universe and rejection of Cartesian dualism may have influenced
Newton's religious ideas. A manuscript he sent to John Locke in which
he disputed the existence of the Trinity was never published. Later
works - The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) and
Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of
St. John (1733) - were published after his death. He also devoted a
great deal of time to alchemy (see above).

Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England from 1689 to
1690 and in 1701, but according to some accounts his only comments
were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that
the window be closed.

Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint
in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of
Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the
Exchequer. He took charge of England's great recoining, somewhat
treading on the toes of Lord Lucas, Governor of the Tower (and
securing the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch
for Edmond Halley). Newton became perhaps the best-known Master of the
Mint upon the death of Thomas Neale in 1699, a position Newton held
until his death. These appointments were intended as sinecures, but
Newton took them seriously, retiring from his Cambridge duties in
1701, and exercising his power to reform the currency and punish
clippers and counterfeiters. As Master of the Mint in 1717 in the "Law
of Queen Anne" Newton moved the Pound Sterling de facto from the
silver standard to the gold standard by setting the bimetallic
relationship between gold coins and the silver penny in favour of
gold. This caused silver sterling coin to be melted and shipped out of
Britain. Newton was made President of the Royal Society in 1703 and an
associate of the French Academie des Sciences. In his position at the
Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer
Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's Historia Coelestis
Britannica, which Newton had used in his studies.

In April 1705, Queen Anne knighted Newton during a royal visit to
Trinity College, Cambridge. The knighthood is likely to have been
motivated by political considerations connected with the Parliamentary
election in May 1705, rather than any recognition of Newton's
scientific work or services as Master of the Mint. Newton was the
second scientist to be knighted, after Sir Francis Bacon.

Towards the end of his life, Newton took up residence at Cranbury
Park, near Winchester with his niece and her husband, until his death
in 1727. Newton died in his sleep in London on 31 March 1727 [OS: 20
March 1726], and was buried in Westminster Abbey. His half-niece,
Catherine Barton Conduitt, served as his hostess in social affairs at
his house on Jermyn Street in London; he was her "very loving Uncle,"
according to his letter to her when she was recovering from
smallpox. Newton, a bachelor, had divested much of his estate to
relatives during his last years, and died intestate.

After his death, Newton's body was discovered to have had massive
amounts of mercury in it, probably resulting from his alchemical
pursuits. Mercury poisoning could explain Newton's eccentricity in
late life.

After death

Fame

French mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange often said that Newton was
the greatest genius who ever lived, and once added that Newton was
also "the most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system
of the world to establish." English poet Alexander Pope was moved by
Newton's accomplishments to write the famous epitaph:

Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night; God said "Let Newton be"
and all was light.

Newton himself had been rather more modest of his own achievements,
famously writing in a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1676:

If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.

Two writers think that the above quote, written at a time when Newton
and Hooke were in dispute over optical discoveries, was an oblique
attack on Hooke (said to have been short and hunchbacked), rather than
- or in addition to - a statement of modesty. On the other hand, the
widely known proverb about standing on the shoulders of giants
published among others by 17th-century poet George Herbert (a former
orator of the University of Cambridge and fellow of Trinity College)
in his Jacula Prudentum (1651), had as its main point that "a dwarf on
a giant's shoulders sees farther of the two", and so its effect as an
analogy would place Newton himself rather than Hooke as the 'dwarf'.

In a later memoir, Newton wrote:

I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to
have been only like a boy playing on the sea-shore, and diverting
myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell
than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered
before me.

Newton remains influential to scientists, as demonstrated by a 2005
survey of members of Britain's Royal Society (formerly headed by
Newton) asking who had the greater effect on the history of science,
Newton or Albert Einstein. Royal Society scientists deemed Newton to
have made the greater overall contribution. In 1999, an opinion poll
of 100 of today's leading physicists voted Einstein the "greatest
physicist ever;" with Newton the runner-up, while a parallel survey of
rank-and-file physicists by the site PhysicsWeb gave the top spot to
Newton.

Commemorations

Newton statue on display at the Oxford University Museum of Natural
History Newton's monument (1731) can be seen in Westminster Abbey, at
the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen, near
his tomb. It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack (1694-1770)
in white and grey marble with design by the architect William
Kent. The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a
sarcophagus, his right elbow resting on several of his great books and
his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design. Above
him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac
and the path of the comet of 1680. A relief panel depicts putti using
instruments such as a telescope and prism. The Latin inscription on
the base translates as:

Here is buried Isaac Newton, Knight, who by a strength of mind almost
divine, and mathematical principles peculiarly his own, explored the
course and figures of the planets, the paths of comets, the tides of
the sea, the dissimilarities in rays of light, and, what no other
scholar has previously imagined, the properties of the colours thus
produced. Diligent, sagacious and faithful, in his expositions of
nature, antiquity and the holy Scriptures, he vindicated by his
philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good, and expressed the
simplicity of the Gospel in his manners. Mortals rejoice that there
has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race! He was
born on 25 December 1642, and died on 20 March 1726/7. — Translation
from G.L. Smyth, The Monuments and Genii of St. Paul's Cathedral, and
of Westminster Abbey (1826), ii, 703-4.

From 1978 until 1988, an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone
appeared on Series D £1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England (the
last £1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England). Newton was shown
on the reverse of the notes holding a book and accompanied by a
telescope, a prism and a map of the Solar System.

A statue of Isaac Newton, looking at an apple at his feet, can be seen
at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History.

In popular culture

According to most scholars, Newton was a monotheist who believed in
biblical prophecies but was Antitrinitarian. 'In Newton's eyes,
worshipping Christ as God was idolatry, to him the fundamental
sin'. Historian Stephen D. Snobelen says of Newton, "Isaac Newton was
a heretic. But ... he never made a public declaration of his private
faith — which the orthodox would have deemed extremely radical. He hid
his faith so well that scholars are still unravelling his personal
beliefs." Snobelen concludes that Newton was at least a Socinian
sympathiser (he owned and had thoroughly read at least eight Socinian
books), possibly an Arian and almost certainly an anti-trinitarian. In
an age notable for its religious intolerance, there are few public
expressions of Newton's radical views, most notably his refusal to
take holy orders and his refusal, on his death bed, to take the
sacrament when it was offered to him.

In a view disputed by Snobelen, T.C. Pfizenmaier argues that Newton
held the Arian view of the Trinity rather than the Western one held by
Roman Catholics, Anglicans, and most Protestants. In his own day, he
was also accused of being a Rosicrucian (as were many in the Royal
Society and in the court of Charles II).

Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's
best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the
Universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock. He said,
"Gravity explains the motions of the planets, but it cannot explain
who set the planets in motion. God governs all things and knows all
that is or can be done."

His scientific fame notwithstanding, Newton's studies of the Bible and
of the early Church Fathers were also noteworthy. Newton wrote works
on textual criticism, most notably An Historical Account of Two
Notable Corruptions of Scripture. He also placed the crucifixion of
Jesus Christ at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally
accepted date. He also tried, unsuccessfully, to find hidden messages
within the Bible.

Newton wrote more on religion than he did on natural science. He
believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism
implicit in Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza. Thus, the ordered and
dynamically informed Universe could be understood, and must be
understood, by an active reason. In his correspondence, Newton claimed
that in writing the Principia "I had an eye upon such Principles as
might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity". He saw
evidence of design in the system of the world: "Such a wonderful
uniformity in the planetary system must be allowed the effect of
choice". But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually
be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of
instabilities. For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to
wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to
move. He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a
perpetual motion." Newton's position was vigorously defended by his
follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence.

Effect on religious thought

Newton and Robert Boyle's mechanical philosophy was promoted by
rationalist pamphleteers as a viable alternative to the pantheists and
enthusiasts, and was accepted hesitantly by orthodox preachers as well
as dissident preachers like the latitudinarians. Thus, the clarity and
simplicity of science was seen as a way to combat the emotional and
metaphysical superlatives of both superstitious enthusiasm and the
threat of atheism, and, at the same time, the second wave of English
deists used Newton's discoveries to demonstrate the possibility of a
"Natural Religion".

The attacks made against pre-Enlightenment "magical thinking", and the
mystical elements of Christianity, were given their foundation with
Boyle's mechanical conception of the Universe. Newton gave Boyle's
ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more
importantly, was very successful in popularising them. Newton
refashioned the world governed by an interventionist God into a world
crafted by a God that designs along rational and universal
principles. These principles were available for all people to
discover, allowed people to pursue their own aims fruitfully in this
life, not the next, and to perfect themselves with their own rational
powers.

Newton saw God as the master creator whose existence could not be
denied in the face of the grandeur of all creation. His spokesman,
Clarke, rejected Leibniz' theodicy which cleared God from the
responsibility for l'origine du mal by making God removed from
participation in his creation, since as Clarke pointed out, such a
deity would be a king in name only, and but one step away from
atheism. But the unforeseen theological consequence of the success of
Newton's system over the next century was to reinforce the deist
position advocated by Leibniz. The understanding of the world was now
brought down to the level of simple human reason, and humans, as Odo
Marquard argued, became responsible for the correction and elimination
of evil.

On the other hand, latitudinarian and Newtonian ideas taken too far
resulted in the millenarians, a religious faction dedicated to the
concept of a mechanical Universe, but finding in it the same
enthusiasm and mysticism that the Enlightenment had fought so hard to
extinguish.

Views of the end of the world

In a manuscript he wrote in 1704 in which he describes his attempts to
extract scientific information from the Bible, he estimated that the
world would end no earlier than 2060. In predicting this he said,
"This I mention not to assert when the time of the end shall be, but
to put a stop to the rash conjectures of fanciful men who are
frequently predicting the time of the end, and by doing so bring the
sacred prophesies into discredit as often as their predictions fail."

Enlightenment philosophers

Enlightenment philosophers chose a short history of scientific
predecessors — Galileo, Boyle, and Newton principally — as the guides
and guarantors of their applications of the singular concept of Nature
and Natural Law to every physical and social field of the day. In this
respect, the lessons of history and the social structures built upon
it could be discarded.

It was Newton's conception of the Universe based upon Natural and
rationally understandable laws that became one of the seeds for
Enlightenment ideology. Locke and Voltaire applied concepts of Natural
Law to political systems advocating intrinsic rights; the physiocrats
and Adam Smith applied Natural conceptions of psychology and
self-interest to economic systems; and sociologists criticised the
current social order for trying to fit history into Natural models of
progress. Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's
work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong
religious views of nature.

Counterfeiters

As warden of the Royal Mint, Newton estimated that 20 percent of the
coins taken in during The Great Recoinage of 1696 were
counterfeit. Counterfeiting was high treason, punishable by the
felon's being hanged, drawn and quartered. Despite this, convicting
the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult. However,
Newton proved to be equal to the task. Disguised as a habitue of bars
and taverns, he gathered much of that evidence himself. For all the
barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of
government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of
authority. Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the
home counties. Then he conducted more than 100 cross-examinations of
witnesses, informers, and suspects between June 1698 and Christmas
1699. Newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners.

One of Newton's cases as the King's attorney was against William
Chaloner. Chaloner's schemes included setting up phony conspiracies of
Catholics and then turning in the hapless conspirators whom he had
entrapped. Chaloner made himself rich enough to posture as a
gentleman. Petitioning Parliament, Chaloner accused the Mint of
providing tools to counterfeiters (a charge also made by others). He
proposed that he be allowed to inspect the Mint's processes in order
to improve them. He petitioned Parliament to adopt his plans for a
coinage that could not be counterfeited, while at the same time
striking false coins. Newton put Chaloner on trial for counterfeiting
and had him sent to Newgate Prison in September 1697. But Chaloner had
friends in high places, who helped him secure an acquittal and his
release. Newton put him on trial a second time with conclusive
evidence. Chaloner was convicted of high treason and hanged, drawn and
quartered on 23 March 1699 at Tyburn gallows.

Laws of motion

The famous three laws of motion (stated in modernised form): Newton's
First Law (also known as the Law of Inertia) states that an object at
rest tends to stay at rest and that an object in uniform motion tends
to stay in uniform motion unless acted upon by a net external
force. The meaning of this law is the existence of reference frames
(called inertial frames) where objects not acted upon by forces move
in uniform motion (in particular, they may be at rest).

Newton's Second Law states that an applied force on an object equals
the rate of change of its momentum with time. (Mathematical formulas
omitted in CW version).

The first and second laws represent a break with the physics of
Aristotle, in which it was believed that a force was necessary in
order to maintain motion. They state that a force is only needed in
order to change an object's state of motion. The SI unit of force is
the newton, named in Newton's honour.

Newton's Third Law states that for every action there is an equal and
opposite reaction. This means that any force exerted onto an object
has a counterpart force that is exerted in the opposite direction back
onto the first object. A common example is of two ice skaters pushing
against each other and sliding apart in opposite directions. Another
example is the recoil of a firearm, in which the force propelling the
bullet is exerted equally back onto the gun and is felt by the
shooter. Since the objects in question do not necessarily have the
same mass, the resulting acceleration of the two objects can be
different (as in the case of firearm recoil).

Unlike Aristotle's, Newton's physics is meant to be universal. For
example, the second law applies both to a planet and to a falling
stone.

The vector nature of the second law addresses the geometrical
relationship between the direction of the force and the manner in
which the object's momentum changes. Before Newton, it had typically
been assumed that a planet orbiting the sun would need a forward force
to keep it moving. Newton showed instead that all that was needed was
an inward attraction from the sun. Even many decades after the
publication of the Principia, this counterintuitive idea was not
universally accepted, and many scientists preferred Descartes' theory
of vortices.

Apple analogy

Newton himself often told the story that he was inspired to formulate
his theory of gravitation by watching the fall of an apple from a
tree.

Cartoons have gone further to suggest the apple actually hit Newton's
head, and that its impact somehow made him aware of the force of
gravity, though this is not reported in the biographical manuscript by
William Stukeley, published in 1752, and made available by the Royal
Society. It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in
the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends, in an
inverse-square proportion, to the Moon; however it took him two
decades to develop the full-fledged theory. John Conduitt, Newton's
assistant at the Royal Mint and husband of Newton's niece, described
the event when he wrote about Newton's life:

In the year 1666 he retired again from Cambridge to his mother in
Lincolnshire. Whilst he was pensively meandering in a garden it came
into his thought that the power of gravity (which brought an apple
from a tree to the ground) was not limited to a certain distance from
earth, but that this power must extend much further than was usually
thought. Why not as high as the Moon said he to himself & if so, that
must influence her motion & perhaps retain her in her orbit, whereupon
he fell a calculating what would be the effect of that supposition.

The question was not whether gravity existed, but whether it extended
so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the moon to
its orbit. Newton showed that if the force decreased as the inverse
square of the distance, one could indeed calculate the Moon's orbital
period, and get good agreement. He guessed the same force was
responsible for other orbital motions, and hence named it "universal
gravitation".

Stukeley recorded in his Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life a
conversation with Newton in Kensington on 15 April 1726, in which
Newton recalled:

when formerly, the notion of gravitation came into his mind. It was
occasioned by the fall of an apple, as he sat in contemplative
mood. Why should that apple always descend perpendicularly to the
ground, thought he to himself. Why should it not go sideways or
upwards, but constantly to the Earth's centre? Assuredly the reason
is, that the Earth draws it. There must be a drawing power in
matter. And the sum of the drawing power in the matter of the Earth
must be in the Earth's centre, not in any side of the Earth. Therefore
does this apple fall perpendicularly or towards the centre? If matter
thus draws matter; it must be proportion of its quantity. Therefore
the apple draws the Earth, as well as the Earth draws the apple."

In similar terms, Voltaire wrote in his Essay on Epic Poetry (1727),
"Sir Isaac Newton walking in his gardens, had the first thought of his
system of gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a tree."

Various trees are claimed to be "the" apple tree which Newton
describes. The King's School, Grantham, claims that the tree was
purchased by the school, uprooted and transported to the headmaster's
garden some years later. The staff of the [now] National Trust-owned
Woolsthorpe Manor dispute this, and claim that a tree present in their
gardens is the one described by Newton. A descendant of the original
tree can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College,
Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there. The
National Fruit Collection at Brogdale can supply grafts from their
tree, which appears identical to Flower of Kent, a coarse-fleshed
cooking variety.

+
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
License; additional terms may apply.

This text was extracted from the Wikipedia article last modified on 19
August 2011 at 03:03 UTC and has been edited and abridged for
transcription into morse code.
% ese ee
