Nikola Tesla

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Nikola Tesla (10 July 1856 - 7 January 1943) was an inventor,
mechanical engineer, and electrical engineer. He was an important
contributor to the birth of commercial electricity, and is best known
for his many revolutionary developments in the field of
electromagnetism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Tesla's
patents and theoretical work formed the basis of modern alternating
current (AC) electric power systems, including the polyphase system of
electrical distribution and the AC motor. This work helped usher in
the Second Industrial Revolution.

Born an ethnic Serb in the village of Smiljan (now part of Gospic), in
the Croatian Military Frontier of the Austrian Empire (modern-day
Croatia), Tesla was a subject of the Austrian Empire by birth and
later became an American citizen. Because of his 1894 demonstration of
wireless communication through radio and as the eventual victor in the
"War of Currents", he was widely respected as one of the greatest
electrical engineers who worked in America. He pioneered modern
electrical engineering and many of his discoveries were of
groundbreaking importance. In the United States during this time,
Tesla's fame rivaled that of any other inventor or scientist in
history or popular culture. Tesla demonstrated wireless energy
transfer to power electronic devices as early as 1893, and aspired to
intercontinental wireless transmission of industrial power in his
unfinished Wardenclyffe Tower project.

Because of his eccentric personality and his seemingly unbelievable
and sometimes bizarre claims about possible scientific and
technological developments, Tesla was ultimately ostracized and
regarded as a mad scientist by many late in his life. Tesla died with
little money at the age of 86 in a hotel suite in New York City.

The SI unit measuring magnetic field B (also referred to as the
magnetic flux density and magnetic induction), the tesla, was named in
his honor (at the CGPM, Paris, 1960).

Early years

Tesla was born to Serbian parents in the village of Smiljan, Austrian
Empire near the town of Gospic, in the territory of modern-day
Croatia. His baptismal certificate reports that he was born on 28 June
(N.S. 10 July), 1856, to Father Milutin Tesla, a priest in the Serbian
Orthodox Church. His paternal origin is thought to be either of one of
the local Serb clans in the Tara valley or from the Herzegovinian
noble Pavle Orlovic. His mother, Duka, daughter of a Serbian Orthodox
Church priest, came from a family domiciled in Lika and Banija, but
with deeper origins to Kosovo. She was talented in making home craft
tools and memorized many Serbian epic poems, but never learned to
read.

Nikola was the fourth of five children, having one older brother
(Dane, who was killed in a horse-riding accident when Nikola was five)
and three sisters (Milka, Angelina and Marica). His family moved to
Gospic in 1862. Tesla attended school at Higher Real Gymnasium in
Karlovac. He finished a four-year term in the span of three years.

Tesla went on to study electrical engineering at the Austrian
Polytechnic in Graz (1875). While there, he studied the uses of
alternating current. Some sources say he received Baccalaureate
degrees from the university at Graz. However, the university says that
he did not receive a degree and did not continue beyond the first
semester of his third year, during which he stopped attending
lectures. In December 1878, Tesla left Graz and broke all relations
with his family. His friends thought that he had drowned in the Mur
River. He went to Marburg, (today's Maribor, in Slovenia), where he
was first employed as an assistant engineer for a year. He suffered a
nervous breakdown during this time. Tesla was later persuaded by his
father to attend the Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague, which he
attended for the summer term of 1880. Here, he was influenced by Ernst
Mach. However, after his father died, he left the university, having
completed only one term.

Tesla engaged in reading many works, memorizing complete books,
supposedly having a photographic memory. Tesla related in his
autobiography that he experienced detailed moments of
inspiration. During his early life, Tesla was stricken with illness
time and time again. He suffered a peculiar affliction in which
blinding flashes of light would appear before his eyes, often
accompanied by visions. Much of the time the visions were linked to a
word or idea he might have come across, at other times they would
provide the solution to a particular problem he had been encountering;
just by hearing the name of an item, he would be able to envision it
in realistic detail. Modern-day synesthetes report similar
symptoms. Tesla would visualize an invention in his mind with extreme
precision, including all dimensions, before moving to the construction
stage; a technique sometimes known as picture thinking. He typically
did not make drawings by hand, instead just conceiving all ideas with
his mind. Tesla also often had flashbacks to events that had happened
previously in his life; these began during his childhood.

In 1880, he moved to Budapest to work under Tivadar Puskas in a
telegraph company, the National Telephone Company. There, he met
Nebojsa Petrovic, a young, Serbian inventor who lived in
Austria. Although their encounter was brief, they did work on a
project together using twin turbines to create continual power. On the
opening of the telephone exchange in Budapest, 1881, Tesla became the
chief electrician to the company, and was later engineer for the
country's first telephone system. He also developed a device that,
according to some, was a telephone repeater or amplifier, but
according to others could have been the first loudspeaker.

France and the United States

In 1882 he moved to Paris, to work as an engineer for the Continental
Edison Company, designing improvements to electric equipment brought
overseas from Edison's ideas. According to his autobiography, in the
same year he conceived the induction motor and began developing
various devices that use rotating magnetic fields for which he
received patents in 1888.

On 6 June 1884, Tesla first arrived in the United States, in New York
City with little besides a letter of recommendation from Charles
Batchelor, a former employer. In the letter of recommendation to
Thomas Edison, it is claimed that Batchelor wrote, 'I know two great
men and you are one of them; the other is this young man', but the
exact contents of the letter is disputed in McNichol's book. Edison
hired Tesla to work for his Edison Machine Works. Tesla's work for
Edison began with simple electrical engineering and quickly progressed
to solving some of the company's most difficult problems. Tesla was
even offered the task of completely redesigning the Edison company's
direct current generators.

Tesla claimed he was offered US$50,000 (about US$1.1 million in 2007,
adjusted for inflation) if he redesigned Edison's inefficient motor
and generators, making an improvement in both service and economy. In
1885 when Tesla inquired about the payment for his work, Edison
replied, "Tesla, you don't understand our American humor," thus
breaking his word. Earning US$18 per week, Tesla would have had to
work for 53 years to earn the amount he was promised. The offer was
equal to the initial capital of the company. Tesla immediately
resigned when he was refused a raise to US$25 per week.

Tesla, in need of work, eventually found himself digging ditches for a
short period of time for the Edison company. He used this time to
focus on his AC polyphase system.

Middle years

In 1886, Tesla formed his own company, Tesla Electric Light and
Manufacturing. The initial financial investors disagreed with Tesla on
his plan for an alternating current motor and eventually relieved him
of his duties at the company. Tesla worked in New York as a laborer
from 1886 to 1887 to feed himself and raise capital for his next
project. In 1887, he constructed the initial brushless alternating
current induction motor, which he demonstrated to the American
Institute of Electrical Engineers (now IEEE) in 1888. In the same
year, he developed the principles of his Tesla coil, and began working
with George Westinghouse at Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing
Company's Pittsburgh labs. Westinghouse listened to his ideas for
polyphase systems which would allow transmission of alternating
current electricity over long distances.

In April 1887, Tesla began investigating what would later be called
X-rays using his own single terminal vacuum tubes (similar to his
patent number 514,170). This device differed from other early X-ray
tubes in that it had no target electrode. The modern term for the
phenomenon produced by this device is bremsstrahlung (or braking
radiation). We now know that this device operated by emitting
electrons from the single electrode through a combination of field
electron emission and thermionic emission. Once liberated, electrons
are strongly repelled by the high electric field near the electrode
during negative voltage peaks from the oscillating HV output of the
Tesla Coil, generating X rays as they collide with the glass
envelope. He also used Geissler tubes. By 1892, Tesla became aware of
the skin damage that Wilhelm Roentgen later identified as an effect of
X rays.

In the early research, Tesla devised several experimental setups to
produce X-rays. Tesla held that, with his circuits, the "instrument
will (... enable one to) generate Roentgen rays of much greater power
than obtainable with ordinary apparatus".

He also commented on the hazards of working with his circuit and
single-node X-ray-producing devices. Of his many notes in the early
investigation of this phenomenon, he attributed the skin damage to
various causes. He believed early on that damage to the skin was not
caused by the Roentgen rays, but the ozone generated in contact with
the skin, and to a lesser extent, nitrous acid. Tesla incorrectly held
that x-rays were longitudinal waves, such as those produced in waves
in plasma. There are known examples of this and these plasma waves can
occur in the situation of force-free magnetic fields. His hypotheses
and experiments were confirmed by others.

Tesla continued research in the field. He performed several
experiments prior to Roentgen's discovery (including photographing the
bones of his hand; later, he sent these images to Roentgen) but did
not make his findings widely known; much of his research was lost in
the 5th Avenue laboratory fire of March 1895.

Tesla demonstrated wireless energy transmission as early as 1891. The
Tesla effect is a term for an application of this type of electrical
conduction (that is, the movement of energy through space and matter,
not just the production of voltage across a conductor).

American citizenship

On 30 July 1891, at the age of 35, he became a naturalized citizen of
the United States. Tesla established his South Fifth Avenue laboratory
in New York in the same year. Later, Tesla established his Houston
Street laboratory in New York at 46 E. Houston Street. He lit electric
lamps wirelessly at both of the New York locations, providing evidence
for the potential of wireless power transmission.

Soon thereafter, in 1892, Tesla was awakened from a dream in which his
mother had died. He returned to Europe for her funeral. After her
death, Tesla fell ill. He spent two to three weeks recuperating in
Gospic and the village of Tomingaj near Gracac, his mother's
birthplace.

Some of Tesla's closest friends were artists. He befriended Century
Magazine editor Robert Underwood Johnson, who adapted several Serbian
poems of Jovan Jovanovic Zmaj (which Tesla translated). Also during
this time, Tesla was influenced by the Vedic philosophy (i.e.,
Hinduism) teachings of the Swami Vivekananda; so much so that, after
his exposure to Hindu-Vedic thought, Tesla started using Sanskrit
words to name some of his fundamental concepts regarding matter and
energy.


Nikola Tesla's AC dynamo used to generate AC which is used to
transport electricity across great distances. It is contained in
U.S. Patent 390,721.  When Tesla was 36 years old, the first patents
concerning the polyphase power system were granted. He continued
research of the system and rotating magnetic field principles. Tesla
served, from 1892 to 1894, as the vice president of the American
Institute of Electrical Engineers, the forerunner (along with the
Institute of Radio Engineers) of the modern-day IEEE. From 1893 to
1895, he investigated high frequency alternating currents. He
generated AC of one million volts using a conical Tesla coil and
investigated the skin effect in conductors, designed tuned circuits,
invented a machine for inducing sleep, cordless gas discharge lamps,
and transmitted electromagnetic energy without wires, building the
first radio transmitter. In St. Louis, Missouri, Tesla made a
demonstration related to radio communication in 1893. Addressing the
Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the National
Electric Light Association, he described and demonstrated in detail
its principles. Tesla's demonstrations were written about widely
through various media outlets. Tesla also investigated harvesting
energy that is present throughout space. He believed that it was
merely a question of time when men would succeed in attaching their
machinery to the very wheelwork of nature, stating: "Ere many
generations pass, our machinery will be driven by a power obtainable
at any point of the universe."

At the 1893 World's Fair, the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago,
an international exposition was held which, for the first time,
devoted a building to electrical exhibits. It was a historic event as
Tesla and George Westinghouse introduced visitors to AC power by using
it to illuminate the Exposition. On display were fluorescent lamps
developed by Westinghouse and single node bulbs. An observer noted:

Within the room was suspended two hard-rubber plates covered with tin
foil. These were about fifteen feet apart, and served as terminals of
the wires leading from the transformers. When the current was turned
on, the lamps or tubes, which had no wires connected to them, but lay
on a table between the suspended plates, or which might be held in the
hand in almost any part of the room, were made luminous. These were
the same experiments and the same apparatus shown by Tesla in London
about two years previous, "where they produced so much wonder and
astonishment".  Tesla also explained the principles of the rotating
magnetic field and induction motor by demonstrating how to make an egg
made of copper stand on end in his demonstration of the device he
constructed known as the "Egg of Columbus".

The Tesla generator was developed by Tesla in 1895, in conjunction
with his developments concerning the liquefaction of air. Tesla knew,
from Lord Kelvin's discoveries, that more heat is absorbed by
liquefied air when it is re-gasified and used to drive something, than
is required by theory; in other words, that the liquefaction process
is somewhat anomalous or 'over unity'. Just prior to Tesla's
completion of his work and the filing of a patent application, Tesla's
laboratory burned down, destroying all his equipment, models and
inventions. Immediately after the fire, Carl von Linde, in Germany,
filed a patent application for the same process.

A "world system" for "the transmission of electrical energy without
wires" that depends upon the electrical conductivity of the earth was
proposed, in which transmission in various natural media with current
that passes between the two points are used to power devices. In a
practical wireless energy transmission system using this principle, a
high-power ultraviolet beam might be used to form a vertical ionized
channel in the air directly above the transmitter-receiver
stations. The same concept is used in virtual lightning rods, the
electrolaser electroshock weapon, and has been proposed for disabling
vehicles.

Edison

Also in the late 1880s, Tesla and Thomas Edison became adversaries in
part because of Edison's promotion of direct current (DC) for electric
power distribution over the more efficient alternating current
advocated by Tesla and Westinghouse. Until Tesla invented the
induction motor, AC's advantages for long distance high voltage
transmission were counterbalanced by the inability to operate motors
on AC. As a result of the "War of Currents", Edison and Westinghouse
went nearly bankrupt, so in 1897, Tesla released Westinghouse from
contract, providing Westinghouse a break from Tesla's patent
royalties. Also in 1897, Tesla researched radiation, which led to
setting up the basic formulation of cosmic rays.

In 1897, at age 41, Tesla filed the first radio patent (U.S. Patent
645,576). A year later, he demonstrated a radio-controlled boat to the
US military, believing that the military would want things such as
radio-controlled torpedoes. Tesla claimed to have developed the "Art
of Telautomatics", a form of robotics, as well as the technology of
remote control. In 1898, he demonstrated a radio-controlled boat to
the public during an electrical exhibition at Madison Square
Garden. Tesla called his boat a "teleautomaton". In the same year,
Tesla devised an "electric igniter" or spark plug for Internal
combustion gasoline engines. He gained U.S. Patent 609,250,
"Electrical Igniter for Gas Engines", on this mechanical ignition
system. Tesla lived in the former Gerlach Hotel, renamed The Radio
Wave building, at 49 W 27th St. (between Broadway and Sixth Avenue),
Lower Manhattan, before the end of the century where he conducted the
radio wave experiments. A commemorative plaque was placed on the
building in 1977 to honor his work. Remote radio control remained a
novelty until WWI and afterward, when a number of countries used it in
military programs.

Colorado Springs

In 1899, Tesla decided to move and began research in Colorado Springs,
Colorado in a lab located near Foote Ave. and Kiowa St., where he
would have room for his high-voltage, high-frequency experiments. Upon
his arrival he told reporters that he was conducting wireless
telegraphy experiments transmitting signals from Pikes Peak to
Paris. Tesla's diary contains explanations of his experiments
concerning the ionosphere and the ground's telluric currents via
transverse waves and longitudinal waves. At his lab, Tesla proved that
the earth was a conductor, and he produced artificial lightning (with
discharges consisting of millions of volts, and up to 135 feet
long). Tesla also investigated atmospheric electricity, observing
lightning signals via his receivers. Reproductions of Tesla's
receivers and coherer circuits show an unpredicted level of complexity
(e.g., distributed high-Q helical resonators, radio frequency
feedback, crude heterodyne effects, and regeneration
techniques). Tesla stated that he observed stationary waves during
this time.

Tesla researched ways to transmit power and energy wirelessly over
long distances (via transverse waves, to a lesser extent, and, more
readily, longitudinal waves). He transmitted extremely low frequencies
through the ground as well as between the Earth's surface and the
Kennelly-Heaviside layer. He received patents on wireless transceivers
that developed standing waves by this method. In his experiments, he
made mathematical calculations and computations based on his
experiments and discovered that the resonant frequency of the Earth
was approximately 8 hertz (Hz). In the 1950s, researchers confirmed
that the resonant frequency of the Earth's ionospheric cavity was in
this range (later named the Schumann resonance).

In Colorado Springs Tesla carried out various long distance wireless
transmission-reception experiments. Tesla effect is the application of
a type of electrical conduction (that is, the movement of energy
through space and matter; not just the production of voltage across a
conductor). Through longitudinal waves, Tesla transferred energy to
receiving devices. He sent electrostatic forces through natural media
across a conductor situated in the changing magnetic flux and
transferred electrical energy to a wireless receiver.

In the Colorado Springs lab, Tesla observed unusual signals that he
later thought may have been evidence of extraterrestrial radio wave
communications coming from Venus or Mars. He noticed repetitive
signals from his receiver which were substantially different from the
signals he had noted from storms and earth noise. Specifically, he
later recalled that the signals appeared in groups of one, two, three,
and four clicks together. Tesla had mentioned that he thought his
inventions could be used to talk with other planets. There have even
been claims that he invented a "Teslascope" for just such a
purpose. It is debatable what type of signals Tesla received or
whether he picked up anything at all. Research has suggested that
Tesla may have had a misunderstanding of the new technology he was
working with, or that the signals Tesla observed may have been
non-terrestrial natural radio source such as the Jovian plasma torus
signals.

Tesla left Colorado Springs on 7 January 1900. The lab was torn down
ca. 1905 and its contents sold to pay debts. The Colorado experiments
prepared Tesla for the establishment of the trans-Atlantic wireless
telecommunications facility known as Wardenclyffe.

Wardenclyffe years

In 1900, with US$150,000 (51pct from J. Pierpont Morgan), Tesla began
planning the Wardenclyffe Tower facility. In June 1902, Tesla's lab
operations were moved to Wardenclyffe from Houston Street. The tower
was dismantled for scrap during World War I. Newspapers of the time
labeled Wardenclyffe "Tesla's million-dollar folly". In 1904, the US
Patent Office reversed its decision and awarded Guglielmo Marconi the
patent for radio, and Tesla began his fight to re-acquire the radio
patent. On his 50th birthday in 1906, Tesla demonstrated his 200 hp
(150 kW) 16,000 rpm bladeless turbine. During 1910-1911 at the
Waterside Power Station in New York, several of his bladeless turbine
engines were tested at 100-5000 hp.

Nobel prize and Tesla

Since the Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Marconi for radio in
1909, Thomas Edison and Tesla were mentioned in a press dispatch as
potential laureates to share the Nobel Prize of 1915, leading to one
of several Nobel Prize controversies. Some sources have claimed that
because of their animosity toward each other neither was given the
award, despite their scientific contributions; that each sought to
minimize the other's achievements and right to win the award; that
both refused to ever accept the award if the other received it first;
and that both rejected any possibility of sharing it.

In the years after these rumors, neither Tesla nor Edison won the
Prize (although Edison did receive one of 38 possible bids in 1915,
and Tesla did receive one bid out of 38 in 1937). Earlier, Tesla alone
was rumored to have been nominated for the Nobel Prize of 1912. The
rumored nomination was primarily for his experiments with tuned
circuits using high-voltage high-frequency resonant transformers.

Later years

In 1915, Tesla filed a lawsuit against Marconi attempting,
unsuccessfully, to obtain a court injunction against Marconi's
claims. After Wardenclyffe, Tesla built the Telefunken Wireless
Station in Sayville, Long Island. Some of what he wanted to achieve at
Wardenclyffe was accomplished with the Telefunken Wireless. In 1917,
the facility was seized and torn down by the Marines, because it was
suspected that it could be used by German spies.

Before World War I, Tesla looked overseas for investors to fund his
research. When the war started, Tesla lost the funding he was
receiving from his patents in European countries. After the war ended,
Tesla made predictions regarding the relevant issues of the post-World
War I environment, in a printed article (20 December 1914). Tesla
believed that the League of Nations was not a remedy for the times and
issues. Tesla started to exhibit pronounced symptoms of
obsessive-compulsive disorder in the years following. He became
obsessed with the number three; he often felt compelled to walk around
a block three times before entering a building, demanded a stack of
three folded cloth napkins beside his plate at every meal, etc. The
nature of OCD was little understood at the time and no treatments were
available, so his symptoms were considered by some to be evidence of
partial insanity, and this undoubtedly hurt what was left of his
reputation.

At this time, he was staying at The Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, renting in
an arrangement for deferred payments. Eventually, the Wardenclyffe
deed was turned over to George Boldt, proprietor of the
Waldorf-Astoria, to pay a US$20,000 debt. In 1917, around the time
that the Wardenclyffe Tower was demolished by Boldt to make the land a
more viable real estate asset, Tesla received AIEE's highest honor,
the Edison Medal.

Tesla, in August 1917, first established principles regarding
frequency and power level for the first primitive radar units.

In 1934, Emile Girardeau, working with the first French radar systems,
stated he was building them "according to the principles stated by
Tesla". By the 1920s, Tesla was reportedly negotiating with the United
Kingdom government about a ray system. Tesla had also stated that
efforts had been made to steal the so called "death ray". It is
suggested that the removal of the Chamberlain government ended
negotiations.

On Tesla's 75th birthday in 1931, Time magazine put him on its
cover. The cover caption noted his contribution to electrical power
generation. Tesla received his last patent in 1928 for an apparatus
for aerial transportation which was the first instance of VTOL
aircraft. By the end of 1931, Tesla released "On Future Motive Power"
which covered an ocean thermal energy conversion system. In 1934,
Tesla wrote to consul Jankovic of his homeland. The letter contained a
message of gratitude to Mihajlo Pupin who had initiated a donation
scheme by which American companies could support Tesla. Tesla refused
the assistance, choosing instead to live on a modest pension received
from Yugoslavia, and to continue his research.

In 1936, Tesla wrote in a telegram to Vladko Macek: "I'm equally proud
of my Serbian origin and my Croatian homeland. Long live all
Yugoslavs."

Field theories

When he was 81, Tesla stated he had completed a "dynamic theory of
gravity". He stated that it was "worked out in all details" and that
he hoped to soon give it to the world. The theory was never published.

The bulk of the theory was developed between 1892 and 1894, during the
period that he was conducting experiments with high frequency and high
potential electromagnetism and patenting devices for their
use. Reminiscent of Mach's principle, Tesla stated in 1925 that:

There is no thing endowed with life-from man, who is enslaving the
elements, to the nimblest creature-in all this world that does not
sway in its turn. Whenever action is born from force, though it be
infinitesimal, the cosmic balance is upset and the universal motion
results.

Tesla was critical of Einstein's relativity work, calling it:

...(a) magnificent mathematical garb which fascinates, dazzles and
makes people blind to the underlying errors. The theory is like a
beggar clothed in purple whom ignorant people take for a king ... its
exponents are brilliant men but they are metaphysicists rather than
scientists ...

Tesla also argued:

I hold that space cannot be curved, for the simple reason that it can
have no properties. It might as well be said that God has
properties. He has not, but only attributes and these are of our own
making. Of properties we can only speak when dealing with matter
filling the space. To say that in the presence of large bodies space
becomes curved is equivalent to stating that something can act upon
nothing. I, for one, refuse to subscribe to such a view.

Tesla also believed that much of Albert Einstein's relativity theory
had already been proposed by Ruder Boskovic, stating in an unpublished
interview:

...the relativity theory, by the way, is much older than its present
proponents. It was advanced over 200 years ago by my illustrious
countryman Ruder Boskovic, the great philosopher, who, notwithstanding
other and multifold obligations, wrote a thousand volumes of excellent
literature on a vast variety of subjects. Boskovic dealt with
relativity, including the so-called time-space continuum ...'.

Directed-energy weapon

Later in life, Tesla made remarkable claims concerning a "teleforce"
weapon. The press called it a "peace ray" or death ray. In total, the
components and methods included:

An apparatus for producing manifestations of energy in free air
instead of in a high vacuum as in the past. This, according to Tesla
in 1934, was accomplished.

A mechanism for generating tremendous electrical force. This,
according to Tesla, was also accomplished.

A means of intensifying and amplifying the force developed by the
second mechanism.

A new method for producing a tremendous electrical repelling
force. This would be the projector, or gun, of the invention.

Tesla worked on plans for a directed-energy weapon from the early
1900s until his death. In 1937, Tesla wrote a treatise entitled "The
Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive Energy through the
Natural Media", which concerned charged particle beams. Tesla
published the document in an attempt to expound on the technical
description of a "superweapon that would put an end to all war." This
treatise describing the particle beam is currently in the Nikola Tesla
Museum archive in Belgrade. It describes an open-ended vacuum tube
with a gas jet seal that allows particles to exit, a method of
charging particles to millions of volts, and a method of creating and
directing nondispersive particle streams (through electrostatic
repulsion).

His records indicate that the device is based on a narrow stream of
atomic clusters of liquid mercury or tungsten accelerated via high
voltage (by means akin to his magnifying transformer). Tesla gives the
following description concerning the particle gun's operation:

(The nozzle would) send concentrated beams of particles through the
free air, of such tremendous energy that they will bring down a fleet
of 10,000 enemy airplanes at a distance of 200 miles from a defending
nation's border and will cause armies to drop dead in their tracks.

The weapon could be used against ground based infantry or for
antiaircraft purposes. Tesla tried to interest the US War Department
in the device. He also offered this invention to European
countries. None of the governments purchased a contract to build the
device. He was unable to act on his plans.

Theoretical inventions

Another of Tesla's theorized inventions is commonly referred to as
Tesla's Flying Machine, which appears to resemble an ion-propelled
aircraft. Tesla claimed that one of his life goals was to create a
flying machine that would run without the use of an airplane engine,
wings, ailerons, propellers, or an onboard fuel source. Initially,
Tesla pondered about the idea of a flying craft that would fly using
an electric motor powered by grounded base stations. As time
progressed, Tesla suggested that perhaps such an aircraft could be run
entirely electro-mechanically. The theorized appearance would
typically take the form of a cigar or saucer.

Personal life

Nikola Tesla was a polyglot, and along with his native tongue he also
spoke Czech, English, French, German, Hungarian, Italian, and Latin.

During his second year of study at Graumltz, Tesla developed a passion
for (and became very proficient at) billiards, chess and card-playing,
sometimes spending more than 48 hours in a stretch at a gaming table.
Tesla by nature required little sleep, claiming to never sleep more
than two hours. On one occasion at his laboratory Tesla worked for a
period of 84 hours without sleep or rest.

Tesla may have suffered from obsessive-compulsive disorder, and had
many unusual quirks and phobias. He did things in threes, and was
adamant about staying in a hotel room with a number divisible by
three. Tesla was physically revolted by jewelry, notably pearl
earrings. He was fastidious about cleanliness and hygiene, and was by
all accounts mysophobic.

Tesla was obsessed with pigeons, ordering special seeds for the
pigeons he fed in Central Park and even bringing injured ones into his
hotel room to nurse them back to health. Tesla was an animal-lover,
often reflecting contentedly about a childhood cat, "The Magnificent
Macak." Tesla never married. He was celibate and claimed that his
chastity was very helpful to his scientific abilities. Nonetheless
there have been numerous accounts of women vying for Tesla's
affection, even some madly in love with him. Tesla, though polite,
behaved rather ambivalently to these women in the romantic sense.

Tesla was prone to alienating himself and was generally
soft-spoken. However, when he did engage in a social life, many people
spoke very positively and admiringly of him. Robert Underwood Johnson
described him as attaining a "distinguished sweetness, sincerity,
modesty, refinement, generosity, and force." His loyal secretary,
Dorothy Skerrit, wrote: "his genial smile and nobility of bearing
always denoted the gentlemanly characteristics that were so ingrained
in his soul." Tesla's friend Hawthorne wrote that "seldom did one meet
a scientist or engineer who was also a poet, a philosopher, an
appreciator of fine music, a linguist, and a connoisseur of food and
drink."

Nevertheless, Tesla could be harsh at times; he openly expressed his
disgust for overweight people, once firing a secretary because of her
weight. He was quick to criticize others' clothing as well, on several
occasions directing a subordinate to go home and change her dress.

Tesla was widely known for his great showmanship, presenting his
innovations and demonstrations to the public as an artform, almost
like a magician. This seems to conflict with his observed
reclusiveness; Tesla was a complicated figure. He refused to hold
conventions without his Tesla coil blasting electricity throughout the
room, despite the audience often being terrified, though he assured
them everything was perfectly safe.

In middle age, Tesla became close friends with Mark Twain. They spent
a lot of time together in his lab and elsewhere.

Tesla remained bitter in the aftermath of his dispute with Edison. The
day after Edison died the New York Times contained extensive coverage
of Edison's life, with the only negative opinion coming from Tesla,
who was quoted as saying:

He had no hobby, cared for no sort of amusement of any kind and lived
in utter disregard of the most elementary rules of hygiene ... His
method was inefficient in the extreme, for an immense ground had to be
covered to get anything at all unless blind chance intervened and, at
first, I was almost a sorry witness of his doings, knowing that just a
little theory and calculation would have saved him 90 percent of the
labor. But he had a veritable contempt for book learning and
mathematical knowledge, trusting himself entirely to his inventor's
instinct and practical American sense.

Shortly before he died, Edison said that his biggest mistake had been
in trying to develop direct current, rather than the superior
alternating current system that Tesla had put within his grasp.

Tesla was good friends with Robert Underwood Johnson. He had amicable
relations with Francis Marion Crawford, Stanford White, Fritz
Lowenstein, George Scherff, and Kenneth Swezey. He ripped up a
Westinghouse contract that would have made him the world's first
billionaire, in part because of the implications it would have on his
future vision of free power, and in part because it would run
Westinghouse out of business, and Tesla had no desire to deal with the
creditors.

Tesla lived the last ten years of his life in a two-room suite on the
33rd floor of the Hotel New Yorker, room 3327. There, near the end of
his life, Tesla showed signs of encroaching senility, claiming to be
visited by a specific white pigeon daily. Several biographers note
that Tesla viewed the death of the pigeon as a "final blow" to himself
and his work.

Tesla believed that war could not be avoided until the cause for its
recurrence was removed, but was opposed to wars in general. However,
Tesla came to find exceptions in which he thought certain situations
and wars were justifiable. Tesla sought to reduce distance, such as in
communication for better understanding, transportation, and
transmission of energy, as a means to ensure friendly international
relations.

Tesla was a life-long bachelor. Like many of his era, he became a
proponent of a self-imposed selective breeding version of eugenics. In
a 1937 interview, he stated:

... man's new sense of pity began to interfere with the ruthless
workings of nature. The only method compatible with our notions of
civilization and the race is to prevent the breeding of the unfit by
sterilization and the deliberate guidance of the mating instinct
.... The trend of opinion among eugenists is that we must make
marriage more difficult. Certainly no one who is not a desirable
parent should be permitted to produce progeny. A century from now it
will no more occur to a normal person to mate with a person
eugenically unfit than to marry a habitual criminal.  In 1926, Tesla
commented on the ills of the social subservience of women and the
struggle of women toward gender equality, indicated that humanity's
future would be run by "Queen Bees". He believed that women would
become the dominant sex in the future.

In his later years Tesla became a vegetarian. In an article for
Century Illustrated Magazine he wrote: "It is certainly preferable to
raise vegetables, and I think, therefore, that vegetarianism is a
commendable departure from the established barbarous habit." Tesla
argued that it is wrong to eat uneconomic meat when large numbers of
people are starving; he also believed that plant food was "superior to
(meat) in regard to both mechanical and mental performance". He also
argued that animal slaughter was "wanton and cruel".

In his final years he suffered from extreme sensitivity to light,
sound and other influences.

Death

Tesla died of heart failure alone in room 3327 of the New Yorker
Hotel, on 7 January 1943. Despite having sold his AC electricity
patents, Tesla died with significant debts. Later that year the US
Supreme Court upheld Tesla's patent number 645576 in a ruling that
served as the basis for patented radio technology in the United
States.

Tesla's funeral took place on 12 January 1943, at the Cathedral of
Saint John the Divine in Manhattan, New York City. His body was
cremated and his ashes taken to Belgrade, Serbia, then-Yugoslavia in
1957. The urn was placed in the Nikola Tesla Museum in Belgrade.

Soon after his death Tesla's safe was opened by his nephew Sava
Kosanovic. Shortly thereafter Tesla's papers and other property were
impounded by the United States' Alien Property Custodian office in
Tesla's compound at the Manhattan Warehouse, even though he was a
naturalized citizen.

Dr. John G. Trump was the main government official who went over
Tesla's secret papers after his death in 1943. At the time, Trump was
a well-known electrical engineer serving as a technical aide to the
National Defense Research Committee of the Office of Scientific
Research and Development, Technical Aids, Div. 14, NTRC (predecessor
agency to the CIA's Office of Scientific Intelligence). Trump was also
a professor at M.I.T., and had his feelings hurt by Tesla's 1938
review and critique of M.I.T.'s huge Van de Graaff generator with its
two thirty-foot towers and two 15-foot-diameter (4.6 m) balls, mounted
on railroad tracks-which Tesla showed could be out-performed in both
voltage and current by one of his tiny coils about two feet
tall. Trump was asked to participate in the examination of Tesla's
papers at the Manhattan Warehouse and Storage Co. Trump reported
afterwards that no examination had been made of the vast amount of
Tesla's property, that had been in the basement of the New Yorker
Hotel, ten years prior to Tesla's death, or of any of his papers,
except those in his immediate possession at the time of his
death. Trump concluded in his report, that there was nothing that
would constitute a hazard in unfriendly hands.

At the time of his death, Tesla had been working on the Teleforce
weapon, or 'death ray,' that he had unsuccessfully marketed to the US
War Department. It appears that Teleforce was related to his research
into ball lightning and plasma, and was conceived as a particle beam
weapon. The US government did not find a prototype of the device in
the safe.

After the FBI was contacted by the War Department, his papers were
declared to be top secret. The personal effects were sequestered on
the advice of presidential advisers; J. Edgar Hoover declared the case
most secret, because of the nature of Tesla's inventions and
patents. One document stated that "(he) is reported to have some 80
trunks in different places containing transcripts and plans having to
do with his experiments". Altogether, in Tesla's effects, there were
the contents of his safe, two truckloads of papers and apparati from
his hotel, another 75 packing crates and trunks in a storage facility,
and another 80 large storage trunks in another storage facility. The
Navy and several "federal officials" spent two days microfilming some
of the material at the Office of Alien Properties storage facility in
1943, and that was it, until Oct., 1945.

Tesla's family and the Yugoslav embassy struggled with the American
authorities to gain these items after his death because of the
potential significance of some of his research. Eventually
Mr. Kosanovic won possession of the materials, which are now housed in
the Nikola Tesla Museum.

Literary works

Apart from doing pure work on inventing things, Tesla also wrote a
number of books and articles for magazines and journals.  Among his
books are My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, The
Fantastic Inventions of Nikola Tesla and The Tesla Papers.

A number of Tesla's writings are freely available on the web,
including the article The Problem of Increasing Human Energy which he
wrote for The Century Magazine, and the article Experiments With
Alternate Currents Of High Potential And High Frequency published in
his book Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla.

Legacy and honors

The tesla (symbol T) - compound derived SI unit of magnetic flux density.

Tesla - a crater on the far side of the moon of 26 kilometers in
diameter at -2,0 deg width, -132.0 deg height.

2244 Tesla - a minor planet.

TPP Nikola Tesla - the largest power plant in Serbia.

The rock band Tesla takes its name from Nikola Tesla.

An electric car company, Tesla Motors, named their company in tribute to Tesla.

The Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport is named in his honor.

Google honoured Tesla on his birthday on 10 July 2009 by displaying a
doodle in the Google search home page, that showed the G as a tesla
coil.

The Czechoslovakian electro-technical company Tesla.

Monuments

The Nikola Tesla Memorial Centre located in his birthplace of Smiljan
near the town of Gospic in Croatia opened in 2006 features a statue of
Tesla designed by sculptor Mile Blazevic. On 7 July 2006 on the corner
of Masarykova and Preradoviceva streets in the Lower Town area in
Zagreb the monument to Tesla was unveiled. This monument was designed
by Ivan Mestrovic in 1952 and was transferred from the Zagreb-based
Ruder Boskovic Institute where it had spent previous decades.

A monument to Tesla was established at Niagara Falls, New York. This
monument, sculpted by Frano Krsinic and portraying Tesla reading a set
of notes, was presented to the United States by Yugoslavia in 1976 and
is an identical copy of the monument standing in front of the
University of Belgrade Faculty of Electrical Engineering. Another
monument to Tesla, featuring him standing on a portion of an
alternator, was established at Queen Victoria Park in Niagara Falls,
Ontario, Canada. The monument was officially unveiled on 9 July 2006
on the 150th anniversary of Tesla's birth. The monument was sponsored
by St. George Serbian Church, Niagara Falls, and designed by Les
Drysdale of Hamilton, Ontario. Drysdale's design was the winning
design from an international competition.

In 1994, acting on the advice of the President's Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation, a formal nomination process was initiated by
the Tesla Wardenclyffe Project seeking placement of the Wardenclyffe
laboratory-office building and the Tesla tower foundation on both the
New York State and National Registers of Historic Places. This would
result in the creation of a monument to Tesla out of the Wardenclyffe
site itself.

Portrayals in popular culture

Nikola Tesla has appeared in popular culture as a character in books,
films, radio, TV, music, live theatre, comics and video games. The
lack of recognition received by Tesla during his own lifetime has made
him a tragic and inspirational character well suited to dramatic
fiction. The impact of the technologies invented by Tesla is a
recurring theme in several types of science fiction.


+
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
License; additional terms may apply.

This text was extracted from the Wikipedia article last modified on 7
September 2011 at 21:20 UTC and has been edited and abridged for
transcription into morse code.

% ese ee


